KARL 
MARX 

UNABRIDGED 

VOL.1 A Critical Analysis 
of Capitalist Production 


Das Kapital. 


Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. 



Von 



Karl Iff ar x, 



Erster Band 
Bach I : Der Prodaktioneproeess des Kapital*. 




CAPITAL 

A Critique of Political Economy 
by KARL MARX 

VOLUME I 

THE PROCESS OF 
CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



TRANSLATED FROM THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION 
BY SAMUEL MOORE AND EDWARD AVELING 

EDITED BY 
FREDERICK ENGELS 




INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS 

New York 



Published 1967 by 

International Publishers Co., Inc. 

381 Park Avenue South New York NY. 10016 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

PARTI 

COMMODITIES AND MONEY 

CHAPTER /.— Commodities 35 

Section 1.— The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and 

Value (the Substance of Value and the Magnitude of Value) 35 
Section 2.— The Two-fold Character of the Labour Embodied 

in Commodities 41 

Section 3.— The Form of Value or Exchange-Value 47 

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value 48 

1 . The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative 

Form and Equivalent Form 48 

2. The Relative Form of Value 49 

a. The Nature and Import of this Form 49 

b. Quantitative Determination of Relative Value. ... 53 

3. The Equivalent Form of Value 55 

4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole . 60 

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value 62 

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value 62 

2. The Particular Equivalent Form 64 

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value. ... 64 



VIII 



CONTENTS 



Page 

C The Genera) Form of Value 65 

1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value 65 

2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form 

of Value, and of the Equivalent Form 67 

3. Transition from the General Form of Value to The Money- 
Form 69 

D The Money-Form 69 

Section 4.— The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret 

thereot 71 

CHAPTER II.— Exchange 84 

CHAPTER 111. — Money, or the Circulation of Commodities ... 94 

Section 1.— The Measure of Values 94 

Section 2. — The Medium of Circulation 103 

a. The Metamorphosis of Commodities 103 

b. The Currency of Money 114 

c. Coin and Symbols of Value 124 

Section 3. — Money 130 

a. Hoarding 130 

b. Means of Payment 134 

c. Universal Money , 142 

PART II 

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL 

CHAPTER IV.— The General Formula for Capital 146 

CHAPTER P.— Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital. 156 

CHAPTER VI.— The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power 167 

part in 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS-VALUE 

CHAPTER VII.— The Labour-Process and the Process of Pro- 
ducing Surplus-Value 177 

Section 1. — The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values. 177 

Section 2. — The Production of Surplus-Value 186 

CHAPTER VIII. — Constant Capital and Variable Capital 199 

CHAPTER IX.— The Rate of Surplus-Value 212 

Section 1.— The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power 212 

Section 2.— The Representation of the Components of the Value 
of the Product by Corresponding Proportional Parts of the 

Product itsell 220 



CONTENTS [IX 



Page 

Section 3.— Senior's "Last Hour" 224 

Section 4. — Surplus-Produce 230 

CHAPTER X — The Working-Day 231 

Section 1.— The Limits of the Working-Day 231 

Section 2. — The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and 

Boyard 235 

Section 3. — Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits 

to Exploitation 243 

Section 4.— Day and Night Work. The Relay System 256 

Section 5.— The Struggle lor a Normal Working-Day. Compul- 
sory Laws tor the Extension of the Working-Day from the 

Middle of the 14th to the End of the 17th Century 264 

Section 6. — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Com- 
pulsory Limitation by Law of the Working-Time. The 

English Factory Acts, 1833 to 1864 278 

Section 7. — The Struggle for the Normal Working-Day. Reaction 

of the English Factory Acts on Other Countries 298 

CHAPTER XI.— Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value 303 

PART IV 

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 

CHAPTER XII.— The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value 312 

CHAPTER XIII.— Co-Operation 322 

CHAPTER XIV.— Division of Labour and Manufacture 336 

Section 1 — Two-fold Origin of Manufacture 336 

Section 2.— The Detail Labourer and his Implements 339 

Section 3. — The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Het- 
erogeneous Manufacture, Serial Manufacture 342 

Section 4. — Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division 

of Labour in Society 350 

Section 5.— The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture .... 359 

CHAPTER XV.— Machinery and Modern Industry 371 

Section 1.— The Development of Machinery 371 

Section 2.— The Value Transferred by Machinery to the 

Product 386. 



X] 



CONTENTS 



Page 
Section 3. — The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman. 394 

a. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by 
Capital. The Employment of Women and Children. 394 

b. Prolongation of the Working-Day 403 

c. Intensification of Labour 409 

Section 4.— The Factory 418 

Section 5. — The Strife Between Workman and Machine 427 

Section 6.— The Theory of Compensation as Regards the Work- 
people Displaced by Machinery . . . . 438 

Section 7. — Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the 

Factory System. Crises in the Cotton Trade 447 

Section 8. — Revolution Effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, 

and Domestic Industry by Modern Industry ... . . 459 

a. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft 

and on the Division of Labour . . . 459 

b. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture 

and Domestic Industries 461 

c. Modern Manufacture 462 

d. Modern Domestic Industry 466 

e. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic 
Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The 
Hastening of this Revolution by the Application 

of the Factory Acts to those Industries. 470 

Section 9. — The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Educational Clauses 

of the same. Their General Extension in England 480 

Section 10. — Modern Industry and Agriculture 504 



PART V 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE 
SURPLUS-VALUE 

CHAPTER XVI.— Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value 508 

CHAPTER XVII— Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour- 
Power and in Surplus-Value. 519 

I. Length ot the Working-Day and Intensity of Labour Con- 
stant Productiveness of Labour Variable 520 

II. Working-Day Constant. Productivenes. oi Labour Con- 
stant Intensity ol Labour Variable 524 

III. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length 
ol the Working Day Variable 526 



CONTENTS 



[XI 



Page 

IV. Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and 

Intensity of Labour 527 

(1.) Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simul- 
taneous Lengthening of the Working-Day 528 

(2.) Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour 

with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working-Day. 530 

CHAPTER XV I II.— Various Formulas for the Rate of Surplus-Value. 531 

PART VI 

WAGES 

CHAPTER XIX.— The Transformation of the Value (and Respec- 
tively the Price) of Labour-Power into Wages 535 

CHAPTER XX.— Time-Wages 543 

CHAPTER XXI.— Piece-Wages 551 

CHAPTER XXII.— National Differences of Wages 559 

PART VII 

THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 564 

CHAPTER XXIII.— Simple Reproduction 566 

CHAPTER XXIV.— Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital . . 579 

Section 1. — Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increas- 
ing Scale. Transition of the Laws of Property that Charac- 
terise Production of Commodities into Laws of Capitalist 
Appropriation 579 

Section 2.— Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of 

Reproduction on a Progressively Increasing Scale 588 

Section 3.— Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and 

Revenue. The Abstinence Theory 591 

Section 4.— Circumstances that, Independently of the Propor- 
tional Division of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue, 
Determine the Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploi- 
tation of Labour-Power. Productivity of Labour. Growing 
Difference in Amount Between Capital Employed and Capital 
Consumed. Magnitude of Capital Advanced 599 

Section 5.— The So-Called Labour-Fund 609 

CHAPTER XXV.— The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 612 
Section 1.— The Increased Demand lor Labour-Power that Accom- 
panies Accumulation, the Composition of Capital Remaining 
the same 612 



XII] CONTENTS 



Page 

Section 2. — Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital 
Simultaneously with the Progress of Accumulation and of the 
Concentration that Accompanies it 621 

Section 3.— Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Popu- 
lation or Industrial Reserve Army. . 628 

Section 4.— Different Forms of the Relative Surplus-Population. 

The General Law of Capitalistic Accumulation 640 

Section 5.— Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist 

Accumulation 648 

a. England from 1846-1866 648 

b. The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial 
Class 654 

c. The Nomad Population 663 

d. Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Work- 
ing-Class 667 

e. The British Agricultural Proletariat 673 

/. Ireland 697 



PART VIII 

THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 

CHAPTER XXVI.— The Secret of Primitive Accumulation. 713 

CHAPTER XXVII. —Expropriation of the Agricultural Popula- 
tion from the Land. 717 

CHAPTER XXVIII.— Bloody Legislation against the Expropriat- 
ed, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of Wages 
by Acts of Parliament 734 

CHAPTER XXIX.— Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer 742 

CHAPTER XXX.— Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on In- 
dustry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital . . 745 

CHAPTER XXXI.— Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist 750 

CHAPTER XXXII.— Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accu- 
mulation 761 

CHAPTER XXXIII.— The Modern Theory of Colonisation 765 

INDEXES 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES 775 

NAME INDEX 797 



PREFACES AND AFTERWORDS 



^^ 5A 

o^ *^-y L$ ££fc^ . &amp;&lt; |£ v* 

^»_^ ^ J. ^ V^&gt; -3-M -yA^ 
lak^- _1_. ^^JUu mnA-vHL 

a*. *t ~=i H^ ^ *^' 



Facsimile of letter written by Marx to Engels on August &gt;6, 1867 
(reduced) 

August 16, 1867, 2 o'clock, night 
Dear Fred, 

Have just finished correcting the last sheet (49th) of the book. The appendix— 
orm of value — takes 1 1/4 sheets in small print. 

Preface ditto sent back yesterday corrected. So this volume is finished. It was 
thanks to you alone that this became possible. Without your selt-sacrifice for me I 
could never possibly have done the enormous work for the three volumes. I embrace 
you, full of thanks! Enclosed two sheets of corrected proofs. 
The £15 received with best thanks. 



Greetings, my dear, beloved friendl 

Your K. Marx 



PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 

The publication of an English version of "Das Kapital" needs 
no apology. On the contrary, an explanation might be expected 
why this English version has been delayed until now, seeing 
that for some years past the theories advocated in this book 
have been constantly referred to, attacked and defended, inter- 
preted and misinterpreted, in the periodical press and the current 
literature of both England and America. 

When, soon after the author's death in 1883, it became evi- 
dent that an English edition of the work was really required, Mr. 
Samuel Moore, for many years a friend of Marx and of the present 
writer, and than whom, perhaps, no one is more conversant with 
the book itself, consented to undertake the translation which 
the literary executors of Marx were anxious to lay before the pub- 
lic. It was understood that I should compare the MS. with the orig- 
inal work, and suggest such alterations as I might deem advisable. 
When, by and by, it was found that Mr. Moore's professional oc- 
cupations prevented him from finishing the translation as quickly 
as we all desired, we gladly accepted Dr. Aveling's offer to under- 
take a portion of the work; at the same time Mrs. Aveling, Marx's 
youngest daughter, offered to check the quotations and to restore 
the original text of the numerous passages taken from English au- 
thors and Blue books and translated by Marx into German. This has 
been done throughout, with but a few unavoidable exceptions. 

The following portions of the book have been translated by 
Dr. Aveling: (1) Chapters X. (The Working-Day), and XI. (Rate 
and Mass of Surplus-Value); (2) Part VI. (Wages, comprising 
Chapters XIX. to XXII.); (3) from Chapter XXIV., Section 4 
(Circumstances that &amp;c.) to the end of the book, comprising the 
latter part of Chapter XXIV., Chapter XXV., and the whole of 
Part VIII. (Chapters XXVI. to XXXIII.); (4) the two Author's 
prefaces. All the rest of the book has been done by Mr, Moore, 



PREFACES 



While, thus, each of the translators is responsible for his share of 
the work only, I bear a joint responsibility .for the whole. 

The third German edition, which has been made the basis 
of our work throughout, was prepared by me, in 1883, with the 
assistance of notes left by the author, indicating the passages of 
the second edition to be replaced by designated passages, from the 
French text published in 1873. 1 The alterations thus effected in 
the text of the second edition generally coincided with changes 
prescribed by Marx in a set of MS. instructions for an English 
translation that was planned, about ten years ago, in America, 
but abandoned chiefly for want of a fit and proper translator. 
This MS. was placed at our disposal by our old friend Mr. F. A. 
Sorge of Hoboken N. J. It designates some further interpolations 
from the French edition; but, being so many years older than 
the final instructions for the third edition, I did not consider myself 
at liberty to make use of it otherwise than sparingly, and chiefly 
in cases where it helped us over difficulties. In the same way, 
the French text has been referred to in most of the difficult pas- 
sages, as an indicator of what the author himself was prepared to 
sacrifice wherever something of the full import of the original 
had to be sacrificed in the rendering. 

There is, however, one difficulty we could not spare the read- 
er: the use of certain terms in a sense different from what they 
have, not only in common life, but in ordinary Political Economy. 
But this was unavoidable. Every new aspect of a science involves 
a revolution in the technical terms of that science. This is best 
shown by chemistry, where the whole of the terminology is rad- 
ically changed about once in twenty years, and where you will 
hardly find a single organic compound that has not gone through 
a whole series of different names. Political Economy has generally- 
been content to take, just as they were, the terms of commercial 
and industrial life, and to operate with them, entirely failing to 
see that by so doing, it confined itself within the narrow circle of 
ideas expressed by those terms. Thus, though perfectly aware 
that both profits and rent are but sub-divisions, fragments of 
that unpaid part of the product which the labourer has to supply 
to his employer (its first appropriator, though not its ultimate 
exclusive owner), yet even classical Political Economy never went 
beyond the received notions of profits and rents, never examined 



1 "Le Capital," par Karl Marx Traduction de M J Roy, entiereroent 
revisee par l'auteur. Paris. Lacbatre." This translation, especially in the 
latter part of the book, contains considerable alterations' in and additions 
to the text of the second German edition. 



PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 



this unpaid part of the product (called by Marx surplus-product) 
in its integrity as a whole, and therefore never arrived at a clear 
comprehension, either of its origin and nature, or of the laws 
that regulate the subsequent distribution of its value. Similarly 
all industry, not agricultural or handicraft, is indiscriminately 
comprised in the term of manufacture, and thereby the distinc- 
tion is obliterated between two great and essentially different 
periods of economic history: the period of manufacture proper, 
based on the division of manual labour, and the period of modern 
industry based on machinery. It is, however, self-evident that 
a theory which views modern capitalist production as a mere 
passing stage in the economic history of mankind, must make 
use of terms different from those habitual to writers who look 
upon that form of production as imperishable and final. 

A word respecting the author's method of quoting may not 
be out of place. In the majority of cases, the quotations serve, 
in the usual way, as documentary evidence in support of asser- 
tions made in the text. But in many instances, passages from eco- 
nomic writers are quoted in order to indicate when, where and by 
whom a certain proposition was for the first time clearly enunciat- 
ed. This is done in cases where the proposition quoted is of im- 
portance as being a more or less adequate expression of the condi- 
tions of social production and exchange prevalent at the time, 
and quite irrespective of Marx's recognition, or otherwise, of its 
general validity. These quotations, therefore, supplement the text 
by a running commentary taken from the history of the science. 

Our translation comprises the first book of the work only. 
But this first book is in a great measure a whole in itself, and 
has for twenty years ranked as an independent work. The second 
book, edited in German by me, in 1885, is decidedly incomplete 
without the third, which cannot be published before the end 
of 1887. When Book III. has been brought out in the original 
German, it will then be soon enough to think about preparing 
an English edition of both. 

"Das Kapital" is often called, on the Continent, "the Bible 
of the working-class." That the conclusions arrived at in this work 
are daily more and more becoming the fundamental principles 
of the great working-class movement, not only in Germany and 
Switzerland, but in France, in Holland and Belgium, in America, 
and even in Italy and Spain, that everywhere the working-class 
more and more recognises, in these conclusions, the most adequate 
expression of its condition and of its aspirations, nobody acquain- 
ted with that movement will deny. And in England, too, 



PREFACES 



the theories of Marx, even at this moment, exercise a power- 
ful influence upon the socialist movement which is spreading in 
the ranks of "cultured " people no less than in those of the 
working-class. But that is not all The time is rapidly approach- 
ing when a thorough examination of England's economic posi- 
tion will impose itself as an irresistible national necessity. The 
working of the industrial system of this country, impossible 
without a constant and rapid extension of production, and there- 
fore of markets, is coming to a dead stop. Free-trade has ex- 
hausted its resources; even Manchester doubts this its quondam 
economic gospel. 1 Foreign industry, rapidly developing, stares 
English production in the face everywhere, not only in protected, 
but also in neutral markets, and even on this side of the Channel. 
While the productive power increases in a geometric, the exten- 
sion of markets proceeds at best in an arithmetic ratio. The de- 
cennial cycle of stagnation, prosperity, over-production and 
crisis, ever recurrent from 1825 to 1867, seems indeed to have 
run its course; but only to land us in the slough of despond of 
a permanent and chronic depression. The sighed-for period of 
prosperity will not come; as often as we seem to perceive its her- 
alding symptoms, so often do they again vanish into air. Mean- 
while, each succeeding winter brings up afresh the great question, 
"what to do with the unemployed "; but while the number of the 
unemployed keeps swelling from year to year, there is nobody 
to answer that question; and we can almost calculate the moment 
when the unemployed losing patience will take their own fate 
into their own hands. Surely, at such a moment, the voice ought 
to be heard of a man whose whole theory is the result of a life- 
long study of the economic history and condition of England, 
and whom that study led to the conclusion that, at least in 
Europe, England is the only country where the inevitable social 
revolution might be effected entirely by peaceful and legal 
means. He certainly never forgot to add that he hardly expected 
the English ruling classes to submit, without a "pro-slavery 
rebellion," to this peaceful and legal revolution. 

Frederick Engels 

November 5, 1886 



1 At the quarterly meeting of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, 
held this afternoon, a warm discussion took place on the subject of Free- 
trade. A resolution was moved to the effect that "having waited in vain 
40 years for other nations to follow the Free-trade example of England, 
this Chamber thinks the time has now arrived to reconsider that position." 
The resolution was rejected by a majority of one only, the figures being 
21 for, and 22 against.— Evening Standard, Nov, 1, 1886. 



PREFACES AND AFTERWORDS 
BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
TO THE GERMAN AND FRENCH EDITIONS 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION 

The work, the first volume of which I now submit to the public, 
forms the continuation of my "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekono- 
mie " (A Contribution to the Criticism of Political Economy) 
published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and the 
continuation is due to an illness of many years' duration that 
again and again interrupted my work. 

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first 
three chapters of this volume. This is done not merely for the 
sake of connexion and completeness. The presentation of the 
subject-matter is improved. As far as circumstances in any way 
permit, many points only hinted at in the earlier book are here 
worked out more fully, whilst, conversely, points worked out 
fully there are only touched upon in this volume. The sections 
on the history of the theories of value and of money are now, of 
course, left out altogether. The reader of the earlier work will 
find, however, in the notes to the first chapter additional sources 
of reference relative to the history of those theories. 

Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To under- 
stand the first chapter, especially the section that contains the 
analysis of commodities, will, therefore, present the greatest 
difficulty. That which concerns more especially the analysis 
of the substance of value and the magnitude of value, I have, as 
much as it was possible, popularised. 1 The value-form, whose 



1 This is the more necessary, as even the section of Ferdinand Lassalle's 
work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which he professes to give "the intel- 
lectual quintessence" of my explanations on these subjects, contains im- 
portant mistakes, If Ferdinand Lassalle has borrowed almost literally from my 



8 PREFACES 

fully developed shape is the money-form, is very elementary 
and simple. Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 
2,000 years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it, whilst on 
the other hand, to the successful analysis of much more composite 
and complex forms, there has been at least an approximation. 
Why? Because the body, as an organic whole, is more easy of 
study than are the cells of that body. In the analysis of economic 
forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical reagents are 
of use. The force of abstraction must replace both. But in bour- 
geois society the commodity-form of the product of labour— or 
the value-form of the commodity — is the economic cell-form. 
To the superficial observer, the analysis of these forms seems to 
turn upon minutiae. It does in fact deal with minutiae, but they 
are of the same order as those dealt with in microscopic anatomy. 

With the exception of the section on value-form, therefore, 
this volume cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I 
pre-suppose, of course, a reader who is willing to learn something 
new and therefore to think for himself. 

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they 
occur in their most typical form and most free from disturbing 
influence, or, wherever possible, he makes experiments under 
conditions that assure the occurrence of the phenomenon in its 
normality. In this work I have to examine the capitalist mode 
of production, and the conditions of production and exchange 
corresponding to that mode. Up to the present time, their classic 
ground is England. That is the reason why England is used as 
the chief illustration in the development of my theoretical ideas. 
If, however, the German reader shrugs his shoulders at the con- 
dition of the English industrial and agricultural labourers, or in 
optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that in Ger- 
many things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, "De 
te fabula narratur! " 

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree 
of development of the social antagonisms that result from the 
natural laws of capitalist production. It is a question of these 
laws themselves, of these tendencies working with iron neces- 
sity towards inevitable results. The country that is more 

writings, and without any acknowledgement, all the general theoreti- 
cal propositions in his economic works, e.g., those on the historical charac- 
ter of capital, on the connexion between the conditions of production and 
the mode of production, &amp;c, &amp;c. , even to the terminology created by me, 
this may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda. I am here, of course, 
not speaking of his detailed working out and application of these proposi- 
tions, with which I have nothing to do. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION 



developed industrially only shows, to the less developed, the 
image of its own future. 

But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully 
naturalised among the Germans (for instance, in the factories 
proper) the condition of things is much worse than in England, 
because the counterpoise of the Factory Acts is wanting. In all 
other spheres, we, like all the rest of Continental Western Europe, 
suffer not only from the development of capitalist production, but 
also from the incompleteness of that development. Alongside of 
modern evils, a whole series of inherited evils oppress us, arising 
from the passive survival of antiquated modes of production, 
with their inevitable train of social and political anachronisms. 
We suffer not only from the living, but from the dead. Le mort 
saisit le viff 

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental 
Western Europe are, in comparison with those of England, 
wretchedly compiled. But they raise the veil just enough to let us 
catch a glimpse of the Medusa head behind it. We should be ap- 
palled at the state of things at home, if, as in England, our gov- 
ernments and parliaments appointed periodically commissions of 
inquiry into economic conditions; if these commissions were 
armed with the same plenary powers to get at the truth; if it was 
possible to find for this purpose men as competent, as free 
from partisanship and respect of persons as are the English fac- 
tory-inspectors, her medical reporters on public health, her com- 
missioners of inquiry into the exploitation of women and children, 
into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic cap that the monsters 
he hunted down might not see him. We draw the magic cap down 
over eyes and ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters. 
Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, 
the American war of independence sounded the tocsin for the Euro- 
pean middle-class, so in the 19th century, the American Civil 
War sounded it for the European working-class. In England the 
progress of social disintegration is palpable. When it has reached 
a certain point, it must re-act on the Continent. There it will take 
a form more brutal or more humane, according to the degree of 
development of the working-class itself. Apart from higher mo- 
tives, therefore, their own most important interests dictate to the 
classes that are for the nonce the ruling ones, the removal of all 
legally removable hindrances to the free development of the 
working-class. For this reason, as well as others, I have given so 
large a space in this volume to the history, the details, and the 
results of English factory legislation. One nation can and should 



10 PREFACES 

learn from others. And even when a society has got upon the right 
track for the discovery of the natural laws of its movement — and 
it is the ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the economic law 
of motion of modern society— it can neither clear by bold leaps, 
nor remove by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the suc- 
cessive phases of its normal development. But it can shorten and 
lessen the birth-pangs. 

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the 
capitalist and the landlord in no sense couleur de rose. But here 
individuals are dealt with only in so far as they are the per- 
sonifications of economic categories, embodiments of particular 
class-relations and class-interests. My standpoint, from which the 
evolution of the economic formation of society is viewed as a proc- 
ess of natural history, can less than any other make the individ- 
ual responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains, 
however much he may subjectively raise himself above them. 

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry 
meets not merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The 
peculiar nature of the material it deals with, summons as foes into 
the field of battle the most violent, mean and malignant passions 
of the human breast, the Furies of private interest. The English 
Established Church, e.g., will more readily pardon an attack on 

38 of its 39 articles than on -^ of its income. Now-a-days atheism 

itself is culpa levis, as compared with criticism of existing property 
relations. Nevertheless, there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, 
e.g., to the Blue book published within the last few weeks: "Corre- 
spondence with Her Majesty's Missions Abroad, regarding Indus- 
trial Questions and Trades' Unions." The representatives of the 
English Crown in foreign countries there declare in so many words 
that in Germany, in France, to be brief, in all the civilised states 
of the European Continent, a radical change in the existing rela- 
tions between capital and labour is as evident and inevitable as in 
England. At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, 
Mr. Wade, vice-president of the United States, declared in public 
meetings that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of 
the relations of capital and of property in land is next upon the 
order of the day. These are signs of the times, not to be hidden by 
purple mantles or black cassocks. They do not signify that to- 
morrow a miracle will happen. They show that, within the ruling- 
classes themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the present 
society is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of change, 
and is constantly changing. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION U 

The second volume of this work will treat of the process of 
the circulation of capital 1 (Book II.), and of the varied forms 
assumed by capital in the course of its development (Book III.), 
the third and last volume (Book IV.), the history of the theory. 

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to 
the prejudices of so-called public opinion, to which I have never 
made concessions, now as aforetime the maxim of the great 
Florentine is mine: 

"Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti," 

Karl Marx 
London, July 25, 1867 



1 On p. 564 the author explains what he comprises under this head, 



12, 



AFTERWORD TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION 

I must start by informing the readers of the first edition 
about the alterations made in the second edition. One is struck 
at once by the clearer arrangement of the book. Additional notes 
are everywhere marked as notes to the second edition. The fol- 
lowing are the most important points with regard to the text 
itself: 

In Chapter I, Section 1, the derivation of value from an 
analysis of the equations by which every exchange-value is ex- 
pressed has been carried out with greater scientific strictness; 
likewise the connexion between the substance of value and the 
determination of the magnitude of value by socially necessary 
labour-time, which was only alluded to in the first edition, is 
now expressly emphasised. Chapter I, Section 3 (the Form of 
Value), has been completely revised, a task which was made 
necessary by the double exposition in the first edition, if nothing 
else. — Let me remark, in passing, that that double exposition 
had been occasioned by my friend, Dr. L Kugelmann in Hanover. 
I was visiting him in the spring of 1867 when the first proof- 
sheets arrived from Hamburg, and he convinced me that most 
readers needed a supplementary, more didactic explanation of 
the form of value. — The last section of the first chapter, "The 
Fetishism of Commodities, etc.," has largely been altered. Chapter 
III, Section 1 (The Measure of Value), has been carefully revised, 
because in the first edition this section had been treated negli- 
gently, the reader having been referred to the explanation already 
given in "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," Berlin 1859. 
Chapter VII, particularly Part 2 [Eng. ed., Chapter IX, Sec- 
tion 2], has been re-written to a great extent. 

It would be a waste of time to go into all the partial textual 
changes, which were often purely stylistic. They occur throughout 



AFTERWORD TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION 13 

the book. Nevertheless I find now, on revising the French trans- 
lation appearing in Paris, that several parts of the German 
original stand in need of rather thorough remoulding, other parts 
require rather heavy stylistic editing, and still others painstaking 
elimination of occasional slips. But there was no time for that. 
^For I had been informed only in the autumn of 1871, when in the 
'midst of other urgent work, that the book was sold out and that the 
printing of the second edition was to begin in January of 1872. 

The appreciation which "Das Kapital" rapidly gained in wide 
circles of the German working-class is the best reward of my 
labours. Herr Mayer, a Vienna manufacturer, who in economic 
matters represents the bourgeois point of view, in a pamphlet 
published during the Franco-German War aptly expounded the 
idea that the great capacity for theory, which used to be consid- 
ered a hereditary German possession, had almost completely 
disappeared amongst the so-called educated classes in Germany, 
but that amongst its working-class, on the contrary, that capacity 
was celebrating its revival. 

To the present moment Political Economy, in Germany, 
is a foreign science. Gustav von Giilich in his "Historical description 
of Commerce, Industry," &amp;C., 1 especially in the two first volumes 
published in 1830, has examined at length the historical circum- 
stances that prevented, in Germany, the development of the capi- 
talist mode of production, and consequently the development, 
in that country, of modern bourgeois society. Thus the soil whence 
Political Economy springs was wanting. This "science" had to be 
imported from England and France as a ready-made article; its 
German professors remained schoolboys. The theoretical expression 
of a foreign reality was turned, in their hands, into a collection of 
dogmas, interpreted by them in terms of the petty trading world 
around them, and therefore misinterpreted. The feeling of scientific 
impotence, a feeling not wholly to be repressed, and the uneasy 
consciousness of having to touch a subject in reality foreign to 
them, was but imperfectly concealed, either under a parade of lit- 
erary and historical erudition, or by an admixture of extraneous 
material, borrowed from the so-called "Kameral" sciences, a medley 
of smatterings, through whose purgatory the hopeless candidate 
for the German bureaucracy has to pass. 

Since 1848 capitalist production has developed rapidly in 
Germany, and at the present time it is in the full bloom of 



1 Geschichtliche Darstellung des Handels, der Gewerbe und des Acker- 
baus, &amp;c, von Gustav von Giilich. 5 vols., Jena. 1830-45. 



14 PREFACES 

speculation and swindling. But fate is still unpropitious to our 
professional economists. At the time when they were able to deal 
with Political Economy in a straightforward fashion, modern 
economic conditions did not actually exist in Germany. And as 
soon as these conditions did come into existence, they did so un- 
der circumstances that no longer allowed of their being really 
and impartially investigated within the bounds of the bourgeois 
horizon. In so far as Political Economy remains within that 
horizon, in so far, i.e., as the capitalist regime is looked upon 
as the absolutely final form of social production, instead of as a 
passing historical phase of its evolution, Political Economy can 
remain a science only so long as the class-struggle is latent or 
manifests itself only in isolated and sporadic phenomena. 

Let us take England. Its Political Economy belongs to the 
period in which the class-struggle was as yet undeveloped. Its 
last great representative, Ricardo, in the end, consciously makes 
the antagonism of class-interests, of wages and profits, of profits 
and rent, the starting-point of his investigations, naively taking 
this antagonism for a social law of Nature. But by this start the 
science of bourgeois economy had reached the limits beyond 
which it could not pass. Already in the lifetime of Ricardo, and 
in opposition to him, it was met by criticism, in the person of 
Sismondi. x 

The succeeding period, from 1820 to 1830, was notable in 
England for scientific activity in the domain of Political Economy. 
It was the time as well of the vulgarising and extending of Ricar- 
do 's theory, as of the contest of that theory with the old school. 
Splendid tournaments were held. What was done then, is little 
known to the Continent generally, because the polemic is for the 
most part scattered through articles in reviews, occasional litera- 
ture and pamphlets. The unprejudiced character of this polemic — 
although the theory of Ricardo already serves, in exceptional 
cases, as a weapon of attack upon bourgeois economy — is ex- 
plained by the circumstances of the time. On the one hand, mod- 
ern industry itself was only just emerging from the age of child- 
hood, as is shown by the fact that with the crisis of 1825 it for the 
first time opens the periodic cycle of its modern life. On the other 
hand, the class-struggle between capital and labour is forced into 
the background, politically by the discord between the govern- 
ments and the feudal aristocracy gathered around the Holy Alliance 
on the one hand, and the popular masses, led by the bourgeoisie 



1 See my work "Zur Kritik, &amp;c," p. 39. 



AFTERWORD TO THE SECON D GERMAN EDITION 15 

on the other; economically by the quarrel between industrial 
capital and aristocratic landed property— a quarrel that in France 
was concealed by the opposition between small and large landed 
property, and that in England broke out openly after the Corn 
Laws. The literature of Political Economy in England at this 
time calls to mind the stormy forward movement in France after 
Dr. Quesnay's death, but only as a Saint Martin's summer 
reminds us of spring. With the year 1830 came the decisive 
crisis. 

In France and in England the bourgeoisie had conquered 
political power. Thenceforth, the class-struggle, practically as 
well as theoretically, took on more and more outspoken and threat- 
ening forms. It sounded the knell of scientific bourgeois econ- 
omy. It was thenceforth no longer a question, whether this the- 
orem or that was true, but whether it was useful to capital or 
harmful, expedient or inexpedient, politically dangerous or not. In 
place of disinterested inquirers, there were hired prize-fighters; in 
place of genuine scientific research, the bad conscience and the evil 
intent of apologetic. Still, even the obtrusive pamphlets with 
which the Anti-Corn Law League, led by the manufacturers 
Cobden and Bright, deluged the world, have a historic interest, 
if no scientific one, on account of their polemic against the 
landed aristocracy. But since then the Free-trade legislation, 
inaugurated by Sir Robert Peel, has deprived vulgar economy 
of this its last sting. 

The Continental revolution of 1848-9 also had its reaction in 
England. Men who still claimed some scientific standing and as- 
pired to be something more than mere sophists and sycophants of 
the ruling-classes, tried to harmonise the Political Economy of 
capital with the claims, no longer to be ignored, of the proletariat. 
Hence a shallow syncretism, of which John Stuart Mill is the best 
representative. It is a declaration of bankruptcy by bourgeois 
economy, an event on which the great Russian scholar and critic, 
N. Tschernyschewsky, has thrown the light of a master mind in 
his "Outlines of Political Economy according to Mill." 

In Germany, therefore, the capitalist mode of production 
came to a head, after its antagonistic character had already, in 
France and England, shown itself in a fierce strife of classes. 
And meanwhile, moreover, the German proletariat had attained 
a much more clear class-consciousness than the German bourgeoi- 
sie. Thus, at the very moment when a bourgeois science of Political 
Economy seemed at last possible in Germany, it had in reality 
again become impossible. 



16 PREFACES 

Under these circumstances its professors fell into two groups. 
The one set, prudent, practical business folk, flocked to the ban- 
ner of Bastiat, the most superficial and therefore the most ade- 
quate representative of the apologetic of vulgar economy; the 
other, proud of the professorial dignity of their science, followed 
John Stuart Mill in his attempt to reconcile irreconcilables. 
Just as in the classical time of bourgeois economy, so also in the 
time of its decline, the Germans remained mere schoolboys, 
imitators and followers, petty retailers and hawkers in the serv- 
ice of the great foreign wholesale concern. 

The peculiar historical development of German society there- 
fore forbids, in that country, all original work in bourgeois 
economy; but not the criticism of that economy. So far as such 
criticism represents a class, it can only represent the class whose 
vocation in history is the overthrow of the capitalist mode of 
production and the final abolition of all classes — the proletariat. 

The learned and unlearned spokesmen of the German bour- 
geoisie tried at first to kill "Das Kapital" by silence, as they had 
managed to do with my earlier writings. As soon as they found 
that these tactics no longer fitted in with the conditions of the time, 
they wrote, under pretence of criticising my book, prescriptions 
"for the tranquillisation of the bourgeois mind." But they found 
in the workers' press — see, e.g., Joseph Dietzgen's articles in 
the Volksstaat — antagonists stronger than themselves, to whom 
(down to this very day) they owe a reply. x 

An excellent Russian translation of "Das Kapital" appeared 
in the spring of 1872. The edition of 3,000 copies is already nearly 
exhausted. As early as 1871, N. Sieber, Professor of Political 
Economy in the University of Kiev, in his work "David Ricardo's 
Theory of Value and of Capital," referred to my theory of value, of 



1 The mealy-mouthed babblers of German vulgar economy fell foul 
of the style of my book. No one can feel the literary shortcomings in "Das 
Kapital" more strongly than I myself. Yet I will for the benefit and the 
enjoyment of these gentlemen and their public quote in this connexion one 
English and one Russian notice. The Saturday Review, always hostile to 
my views, said in its notice of the first edition: "The presentation of the 
subject invests the driest economic questions with a certain peculiar charm." 
The "St. Petersburg Journal" (Sankt-Peterburgskie Viedomosti), in its issue 
of April 20, 1872, says: "The presentation of the subject, with the exception 
of one or two exceptionally special parts, is distinguished by its compre- 
hensibility by the general reader, its clearness, and, in spite of the scientific 
intricacy of the subject, by an unusual liveliness. In this respect the author 
in no way resembles ... the majority of German scholars who ... write their 
books in a language so dry and obscure that the heads of ordinary mortals 
are cracked by it." 



AFTERWORD TO THE SECON D GERMAN EDITION 17 

money and of capital, as in its fundamentals a necessary sequel to 
the teaching of Smith and Ricardo. That which astonishes the 
Western European in the reading of this excellent work, is the 
author's consistent and firm grasp of the purely theoretical posi- 
tion. 

That the method employed in "Das Kapital" has been little 
understood, is shown by the various conceptions, contradictory 
one to another, that have been formed of it. 

Thus the Paris Revue Positiviste reproaches me in that, on the 
one hand, I treat economics metaphysically, and on the other 
hand— imagine!— confine myself to the mere critical analysis of 
actual facts, instead of writing receipts (Gomtist ones?) for the 
cook-shops of the future. In answer to the reproach in re meta- 
physics, Professor Sieber has it: "In so far as it deals with actual 
theory, the method of Marx is the deductive method of the whole 
English school, a school whose failings and virtues are common 
to the best theoretic economists." M. Block — "Les Theoriciens du 
Socialisme en Allemagne. Extrait du Journal des Economistes, 
Juillet et Aout 1872" — makes the discovery that my method is 
analytic and says: "Par cet ouvrage M. Marx se classe parmi les 
esprits analytiques les plus eminents." German reviews, of course, 
shriek out at "Hegelian sophistics." The European Messenger of 
St. Petersburg in an article dealing exclusively with the method 
of "Das Kapital" (May number, 1872, pp. 427-436), finds my 
method of inquiry severely realistic, but my method of presenta- 
tion, unfortunately, German-dialectical. It says: "At first sight, if 
the judgment is based on the external form of the presentation of 
the subject, Marx is the most ideal of ideal philosophers, always 
in the German, i.e., the bad sense of the word. But in point of 
fact he is infinitely more realistic than all his fore-runners in the 
work of economic criticism. He can in no sense be called an 
idealist." I cannot answer the writer better than by aid of a few 
extracts from his own criticism, which may interest some of my 
readers to whom the Russian original is inaccessible. 

After a quotation from the preface to my "Criticism of Politi- 
cal Economy," Berlin, 1859, pp. IV-VII, where I discuss the mate- 
rialistic basis of my method, the writer goes on: "The one thing 
which is of moment to Marx, is to find the law of the phenomena 
with whose investigation he is concerned; and not only is that 
law of moment to him, which governs these phenomena, in so 
far as they have a definite form and mutual connexion within a 
given historical period. Of still greater moment to him is the law 
of their variation, of their development, i.e., of their transition 



18 PREFACES 

from one form into another, from one series of connexions into 
a different one. This law once discovered, he investigates in 
detail the effects in which it manifests itself in social life. 
Consequently, Marx only troubles himself about one thing: to 
show, by rigid scientific investigation, the necessity of successive 
determinate orders of social conditions, and to establish, as 
impartially as possible, the facts that serve him for fundamental 
starting-points. For this it is quite enough, if he proves, at the same 
time, both the necessity of the present order of things, and the 
necessity of another order into which the first must inevitably pass 
over; and this all the same, whether men believe or do not believe 
it, whether they are conscious or unconscious of it. Marx treats the 
social movement as a process of natural history, governed by laws 
not only independent of human will, consciousness and intelli- 
gence, but rather, on the contrary, determining that will, con- 
sciousness and intelligence.... If in the history of civilisation 
the conscious element plays a part so subordinate, then it is 
self-evident that a critical inquiry whose subject-matter is civ- 
ilisation, can, less than anything else, have for its basis any form 
of, or any result of, consciousness. That is to say, that not the 
idea, but the material phenomenon alone can serve as its starting- 
point. Such an inquiry will confine itself to the confrontation and 
the comparison of a fact, not with ideas, but with another fact. 
For this inquiry, the one thing of moment is, that both facts be 
investigated as accurately as possible, and that they actually 
form, each with respect to the other, different momenta of an 
evolution; but most important of all is the rigid analysis of the 
series of successions, of the sequences and concatenations in which 
the different stages of such an evolution present themselves. But 
it will be said, the general laws of economic life are one and the 
same, no matter whether they are applied to the present or the 
past. This Marx directly denies. According to him, such abstract 
laws do not exist. On the contrary, in his opinion every histori- 
cal period has laws of its own.... As soon as society has out- 
lived a given period of development, and is passing over from one 
given stage to another, it begins to be subject also to other laws. 
In a word, economic life offers us a phenomenon analogous to the 
history of evolution in other branches of biology. The old econo- 
mists misunderstood the nature of economic laws when they lik- 
ened them to the laws of physics and chemistry. A more thorough 
analysis of phenomena shows that social organisms differ among 
themselves as fundamentally as plants or animals. Nay, one and 
the same phenomenon falls under quite different laws in conse- 



AFTERWORD TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION lg 

quence of the different structure of those organisms as a whole, of 
the variations of their individual organs, of the different conditions 
in which those organs function, &amp;c. Marx, e.g., denies that the 
law of population is the same at all times and in all places. He 
asserts, on the contrary, that every stage of development has its 
own law of population.... With the varying degree of develop- 
ment of productive power, social conditions and the laws govern- 
ing them vary too. Whilst Marx sets himself the task of following 
and explaining from this point of view the economic system estab- 
lished by the sway of capital, he is only formulating, in a strictly 
scientific manner, the aim that every accurate investigation into 
economic life must have. The scientific value of such an inquiry 
lies in the disclosing of the special laws that regulate the origin, 
existence, development, death of a given social organism and its 
replacement by another and higher one. And it is this value that, 
in point of fact, Marx's book has." 

Whilst the writer pictures what he takes to be actually my 
method, in this striking and [as far as concerns my own applica- 
tion of it] generous way, what else is he picturing but the dialec- 
tic method? 

Of course the method of presentation must differ in form from 
that of inquiry. The latter has to appropriate the material in 
detail, to analyse its different forms of development, to trace 
out their inner connexion. Only after this work is done, can the 
actual movement be adequately described. If this is done suc- 
cessfully, if the life of the subject-matter is ideally reflected as in 
a mirror, then it may appear as if we had before us a mere a 
priori construction. 

My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, 
but is its direct opposite. To Hegel, the life-process of the human 
brain, i.e., the process of thinking, which, under the name of 
"the Idea," he even transforms into an independent subject, 
is the demiurgos of the real world, and the real world is 
only the external, phenomenal form of "the Idea." With me, 
on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world 
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought. 

The mystifying side of Hegelian dialectic I criticised nearly 
thirty years ago, at a time when it was still the fashion. But 
just as I was working at the first volume of "Das Kapital," it 
was the good pleasure of the peevish, arrogant, mediocre 'Emyovo'. 
who now talk large in cultured Germany, to treat Hegel in same 
way as the brave Moses Mendelssohn in Lessing's time treated 
Spinoza, i.e., as a "dead dog." I therefore openly avowed myself 



20 PREFACES 

the pupil of that mighty thinker, and even here and there, in the 
chapter on the theory of value, coquetted with the modes of ex- 
pression peculiar to him. The mystification which dialectic suffers 
in Hegel's hands, by no means prevents him from being the first 
to present its general form of working in a comprehensive and con- 
scious manner. With him it is standing on its head. It must be 
turned right side up again, if you would discover the rational 
kernel within the mystical shell. 

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, 
because it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state 
of things. In its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to 
bourgeoisdom and its doctrinaire professors, because it includes 
in its comprehension and affirmative recognition of the existing 
state of things, at the same time also, the recognition of the nega- 
tion of that state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards 
every historically developed social form as in fluid movement, 
and therefore takes into account its transient nature not less than 
its momentary existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, 
and is in its essence critical and revolutionary. 

The contradictions inherent in the movement of capitalist 
society impress themselves upon the practical bourgeois most 
strikingly in the changes of the periodic cycle, through which 
modern industry runs, and whose crowning point is the univer- 
sal crisis. That crisis is once again approaching, although as 
yet but in its preliminary stage; and by the universality of its 
theatre and the intensity of its action it will drum dialectics 
even into the heads of the mushroom-upstarts of the new, holy 
Prusso-German empire. 

Karl Marx 

London, January 24, 1873 



21 



PREFACE TO THE FRENCH EDITION 

To the citizen Maurice Lachatre 
Dear Citizen, 

I applaud your idea of publishing the translation of "Das 
Kapital" as a serial. In this form the book will be more accessible 
to the working-class, a consideration which to me outweighs 
everything else. 

That is the good side of your suggestion, but here is the reverse 
of the medal: the method of analysis which I have employed, and 
which had not previously been applied to economic subjects, 
makes the reading of the first chapters rather arduous, and it is 
to be feared that the French public, always impatient to come to 
a conclusion, eager to know the connexion between general 
principles and the immediate questions that have aroused their 
passions, may be disheartened because they will be unable to 
move on at once. 

That is a disadvantage I am powerless to overcome, unless 
it be by forewarning and forearming those readers who zealously 
seek the truth. There is no royal road to science, and only those 
who do not dread the fatiguing climb of its steep paths have a 
chance of gaining its luminous summits. 

Believe me, 

dear citizen 

Your devoted, 

Karl Marx 

London, March 18, 1872 



22 



AFTERWORD TO THE FRENCH EDITION 

Mr. J. Roy set himself the task of producing a version that 
would be as exact and even literal as possible, and has scrupu- 
lously fulfilled it. But his very scrupulosity has compelled me to 
modify his text, with a view to rendering it more intelligible to 
the reader. These alterations, introduced from day to day, as the 
book was published in parts, were not made with equal care and 
were bound to result in a lack of harmony in style. 

Having once undertaken this work of revision, I was led to 
apply it also to the basic original text (the second German edi- 
tion), to simplify some arguments, to complete others, to give 
additional historical or statistical material, to add critical sugges- 
tions, etc. Hence, whatever the literary defects of this French 
edition may be, it possesses a scientific value independent of the 
original and should be consulted even by readers familiar with 
German. 

Below I give the passages in the Afterword to the second Ger- 
man edition which treat of the development of Political Economy 
in Germany and the method employed in the present work. 

Karl Marx 

London, April 28, 1875 



23 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION 

Marx was not destined to get this, the third, edition ready 
for press himself. The powerful thinker, to whose greatness even 
his opponents now make obeisance, died on March 14, 1883. 

Upon me who in Marx lost the best, the truest friend I had— 
and had for forty years — the friend to whom I am more indebted 
than can be expressed in words — upon me now devolved the duty 
of attending to the publication of this third edition, as well as of 
the second volume, which Marx had left behind in manuscript. 
I must now account here to the reader for the way in which I 
discharged the first part of my duty. 

It was Marx's original intention to re-write a great part of the 
text of Volume I, to formulate many theoretical points more exact- 
ly, insert new ones and bring historical and statistical materials 
up to date. But his ailing condition and the urgent need to do the 
final editing of Volume II induced him to give up this scheme. Only 
the most necessary alterations were to be made, only the insertions 
which the French edition ("Le Capital." Par Karl Marx. Paris, 
Lachatre 1873) already contained, were to be put in. 

Among the books left by Marx there was a German copy 
which he himself had corrected here and there and provided with 
references to the French edition; also a French copy in which he 
had indicated the exact passages to be used. These alterations 
and additions are confined, with few exceptions, to the last 
[Engl, ed.: second last] part of the book: "The Accumulation of 
Capital." Here the previous text followed the original draft more 
closely than elsewhere, while the preceding sections had been gone 
over more thoroughly. The style was therefore more vivacious, 
more of a single cast, but also more careless, studded with Angli- 
cisms and in parts unclear; there were gaps here and there in the 



24 PREFACES 



presentation of arguments, some important particulars being- 
merely alluded to. 

With regard to the style, Marx had himself thoroughly re- 
vised several sub-sections and thereby had indicated to me here, 
as well as in numerous oral suggestions, the length to which I 
could go in eliminating English technical terms and other Angli- 
cisms. Marx would in any event have gone over the additions and 
supplemental texts and have replaced the smooth French with 
his own terse German; I had to be satisfied, when transferring them, 
with bringing them into maximum harmony with the original 
text. 

Thus not a single word was changed in this third edition with- 
out my firm conviction that the author would have altered it 
himself. It would never occur to me to introduce into "Das Kapital" 
the current jargon in which German economists are wont to ex- 
press themselves— that gibberish in which, for instance, one who 
for cash has others give him their labour is called a labour- giver 
(ArbQitgeber) and one whose labour is taken away from him for 
wages is called a labour-ta/cer (Arbeitnehmer) . In French, too, the 
word "travail" is used in every-day life in the sense of "occupation." 
But the French would rightly consider any economist crazy 
should he call the capitalist a donneur de travail (a labour-giver) 
or the worker a receveur de travail (a labour-taker). 

Nor have I taken the liberty to convert the English coins and 
moneys, measures and weights used throughout the text to their 
new-German equivalents. When the first edition appeared there 
were as many kinds of measures and weights in Germany as there 
are days in the year? Besides there were two kinds of marks (the 
Reichsmark existed at the time only in the imagination of Soet- 
beer, who had invented it in the late thirties), two kinds of gulden 
and at least three kinds of taler, including one called neues Zwei- 
drittel. In the natural sciences the metric system prevailed, in 
the world market — English measures and weights. Under such 
circumstances English units of measure were quite natural for 
a book which had to take its factual proofs almost exclusively 
from British industrial relations. The last-named reason is de- 
cisive even to-day, especially because the corresponding relations 
in the world market have hardly changed and English weights and 
measures almost completely control precisely the key industries, 
iron and cotton. 

In conclusion a few words on Marx's art of quotation, which 
is so little understood. When they are pure statements of fact or 
descriptions, the quotations, from the English Blue books, for 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION 25 

example, serve of course as simple documentary proof. But this 
is not so when the theoretical views of other economists are cited. 
Here the quotation is intended merely to state where, when and 
by whom an economic idea conceived in the course of develop- 
ment was first clearly enunciated. Here the only consideration is 
that the economic conception in question must be of some signifi- 
cance to the history of science, that it is the more or less adequate 
theoretical expression of the economic situation of its time. But 
whether this conception still possesses any absolute or relative 
validity from the standpoint of the author or whether it already 
has become wholly past history is quite immaterial. Hence these 
quotations are only a running commentary to the text, a commen- 
tary borrowed from the history of economic science, and establish 
the dates and originators of certain of the more important ad- 
vances in economic theory. And that was a very necessary thing in 
a science whose historians have so far distinguished themselves 
only by tendentious ignorance characteristic of careerists. It will 
now be understandable why Marx, in consonance with the 
Afterword to the second edition, only in very exceptional cases had 
occasion to quote German economists. 

There is hope that the second volume will appear in the 
course of 1884. 

Frederick Engels 

London, November 7, 1883 



26 



PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION 

The fourth edition required that I should establish in final 
form, as nearly as possible, both text and footnotes. The fol- 
lowing brief explanation will show how I have fulfilled this task. 

After again comparing the French edition and Marx's manu- 
script remarks I have made some further additions to the German 
text from that translation. They will be found on p. 80 (3rd edition, 
p. 88) [present edition, pp. 116-17], pp. 458-60 (3rd edition, pp. 
509-10) [present edition, pp. 492-95],* pp. 547-51 (3rd edition, 
p. 600) [present edition, pp. 584-87], pp. 591-93 (3rd edi- 
tion, p. 644) [present edition, pp. 626-28] and p. 596 (3rd 
edition, p. 648) [present edition, p. 631] in Note 1. I have also 
followed the example of the French and English editions by put- 
ting the long footnote on the miners into the text (3rd edition, pp. 
509-15; 4th edition, pp. 461-67) [present edition, pp. 495- 
502]. Other small alterations are of a purely technical nature. 

Further, I have added a few more explanatory notes, espe- 
cially where changed historical conditions seemed to demand 
this. All these additional notes are enclosed in square brackets 
and marked either with my initials or "D. H."** 

Meanwhile a complete revision of the numerous quotations 
had been made necessary by the publication of the English edi- 
tion. For this edition Marx's youngest daughter, Eleanor, under- 
took to compare all the quotations with their originals, so that 
those taken from English sources, which constitute the vast ma- 
jority, are given there not as re-translations from the German but 
in the original English form. In preparing the fourth edition it 

* In the English edition of 1887 this addition was made by Engels 
himself. — Ed. 

** In the present edition they are put into square brackets and marked 
with the initials "F. E."— Ed. 



PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION 27 

was therefore incumbent upon me to consult this text. The com- 
parison revealed various small inaccuracies. Page numbers wrong- 
ly indicated, due partly to mistakes in copying from note-books, 
and partly to the accumulated misprints of three editions; mis- 
placed quotation or omission marks, which cannot be avoided 
when a mass of quotations is copied from note-book extracts; 
here and there some rather unhappy translation of a word; partic- 
ular passages quoted from the old Paris note-books of 1843-45, 
when Marx did not know English and was reading English 
economists in French translations, so that the double translation 
yielded a slightly different shade of meaning, e.g., in the case of 
Steuart, Ure, etc., where the English text had now to be used — 
and other similar instances of trifling inaccuracy or negligence. 
But anyone who compares the fourth edition with the previous 
ones can convince himself that all this laborious process of emen- 
dation has not produced the smallest change in the book worth 
speaking of. There was only one quotation which could not be 
traced— the one from Richard Jones (4th edition, p. 562, note 
47). Marx probably slipped up when writing down the title of the 
book.* All the other quotations retain their cogency in full, 
or have enhanced it due to their present exact form. 

Here, however, I am obliged to revert to an old story. 

I know of only one case in which the accuracy of a quotation 
given by Marx has been called in question. But as the issue 
dragged beyond his lifetime I cannot well ignore it here. 

On March 7, 1872, there appeared in the Berlin Concordia, 
organ of the German Manufacturers' Association, an anonymous 
article entitled: "How Karl Marx Quotes." It was here asserted, 
with an effervescence of moral indignation and unparliamentary 
language, that the quotation from Gladstone's Budget Speech 
of April 16, 1863 (in the Inaugural Address of the Internationa) 
Workingmen's Association, 1864, and repeated in "Capital," Vol. 
I, p. 617, 4th edition; p. 671, 3rd edition) [present edition, 
p. 651], had been falsified; that not a single word of the sentence: 
"this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power ... is ... 
entirely confined to classes of property" was to be found in the 
(semi-official) stenographic report in Hansard. "But this sentence 
is nowhere to be found in Gladstone's speech. Exactly the oppo- 
site is stated there." (In bold type): "This sentence, both in form 
and substance, is a lie inserted by Marx." 



* Marx was not mistaken in the title ot the book bat in the page. He 
put down 36 instead of 37. (See p. 598 of the present edition.)— Ed. 



28 PREFACES 



Marx, to whom the number of Concordia was sent the fol- 
lowing May, answered the anonymous author in the Volksstaat of 
June 1st. As he could not recall which* newspaper report he 
had used for the quotation, he limited himself to citing, first the 
equivalent quotation from two English publications, and then 
the report in The Times, according to which Gladstone says: 

"That is the state of the case as regards the wealth of this 
country. I must say for one, I should look almost with apprehen- 
sion and with pain upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth 
and power, if it were my belief that it was confined to classes 
who are in easy circumstances. This takes no cognisance at all of 
the condition of the labouring population. The augmentation I have 
described and which is founded, I think, upon accurate returns, is 
an augmentation entirely confined to classes possessed of property." 

Thus Gladstone says here that he would be sorry if it were so, 
but it is so: this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power 
is entirely confined to classes of property. And as to the semi- 
official Hansard, Marx goes on to say: "In the version which he 
afterwards manipulated [zurechtgestumpert], Mr. Gladstone was 
astute enough to obliterate [wegzupfuschen] this passage, which, 
coming from an English Chancellor of the Exchequer, was certain- 
ly compromising. This, by the way, is a traditional usage in the 
English parliament and not an invention gotten up by little 
Lasker against Bebel." 

The anonymous writer gets angrier and angrier. In his answer 
in Concordia July 4th, he sweeps aside second-hand sources and 
demurely suggests that it is the "custom" to quote parliamentary 
speeches from the stenographic report; adding, however, that 
The Times report (which includes the "falsified" sentence) and 
the Hansard report (which omits it) are "substantially in complete 
agreement," while The Times report likewise contains "the exact 
opposite to that notorious passage in the Inaugural Address." 
This fellow carefully conceals the fact that The Times report 
explicitly includes that self-same "notorious passage," alongside 
of its alleged "opposite." Despite all this, however, the anony- 
mous one feels that he is stuck fast and that only some new dodge 
can save him. Thus, whilst his article bristles, as we have just 
shown, with "impudent mendacity" and is interlarded with such 
edifying terms of abuse as "bad faith," "dishonesty," "lying alle- 
gation," "that spurious quotation," "impudent mendacity," 
"a quotation entirely falsified," "this falsification," "sim- 
ply infamous," etc., he finds it necessary to divert the issue 
to another domain and therefore promises "to explain in ajsecond 



PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION 29 

article the meaning which we (the non-mendacious anonymous one) 
attribute to the content of Gladstone's words." As if his particular 
opinion, of no decisive value as it is, had anything whatever to do 
with the matter. This second article was printed in Concordia on 
July 11th. 

Marx replied again in the Volksstaat of August 7th now 
giving also the reports of the passage in question from the Morn- 
ing Star and the Morning Advertiser of April 17, 1863. According 
to both reports Gladstone said that he would look with appre- 
hension, etc., upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and 
power if he believed it to be confined to "classes in easy circum- 
stances." But this augmentation was in fact "entirely confined to 
classes possessed of property." So these reports too reproduced 
word for word the sentence alleged to have been "lyingly inserted." 
Marx further established once more, by a comparison of The 
Times and the Hansard texts that this sentence, which three 
newspaper reports of identical content, appearing independently 
of one another the next morning, proved to have been really 
uttered, was missing from the Hansard report, revised according 
to the familiar "custom," and that Gladstone, to use Marx's 
words, "had afterwards conjured it away." In conclusion Marx 
stated that he had no time for further intercourse with the anon- 
ymous one. The latter also seems to have had enough, at any 
rate Marx received no further issues of Concordia. 

With this the matter appeared to be dead and buried. True, 
once or twice later on there reached us, from persons in touch 
with the University of Cambridge, mysterious rumours of an 
unspeakable literary crime which Marx was supposed to have 
committed in "Capital"; but despite all investigation nothing more 
definite could be learned. Then, on November 29, 1883, eight 
months after Marx's death, there appeared in The Times a letter 
headed Trinity College, Cambridge, and signed Sedley Taylor, 
in which this little man, who dabbles in the mildest sort of co- 
operative affairs, seizing upon some chance pretext or other, at 
last enlightened us, not only concerning those vague Cambridge 
rumours, but also the anonymous one in Concordia. 

"What appears extremely singular," says the little man 
from Trinity College, "is that it was reserved for Professor Bren- 
tano (then of the University of Breslau, now of that of Strass- 
burg) to expose... the bad faith which had manifestly dic- 
tated the citation made from Mr. Gladstone's speech in the [Inau- 
gural] Address. Herr Karl Marx, who ... attempted to defend 
the citation, had the hardihood, in the deadly shifts to which 



30 PREFACES 

Brentano's masterly conduct of the attack speedily reduced him, 
to assert that Mr. Gladstone had 'manipulated' the report of his 
speech in The Times of April 17, 1863, before it appeared in Han- 
sard, in order to 'obliterate' a passage which 'was certainly com- 
promising' for an English Chancellor of the Exchequer. On Bren- 
tano's showing, by a detailed comparison of texts, that the 
reports of The Times and of Hansard agreed in utterly excluding 
the meaning which craftily isolated quotation had put upon 
Mr. Gladstone's words, Marx withdrew from further controversy 
under the plea of 'want of time.'" 

So that was at the bottom of the whole business! And thus 
was the anonymous campaign of Herr Brentano in Concordia glo- 
riously reflected in the productively co-operating imagination of 
Cambridge. Thus he stood, sword in hand, and thus he battled, 
in his "masterly conduct of the attack," this St. George of the 
German Manufacturers' Association, whilst the infernal dragon 
Marx, "in deadly shifts," "speedily" breathed his last at his feet. 

All this Ariostian battle-scene, however, only serves to conceal 
the dodges of our St. George. Here there is no longer talk of "lying 
insertion" or "falsification," but of "craftily isolated quotation." 
The whole issue was shifted, and St. George and his Cambridge 
squire very well knew why. 

Eleanor Marx replied in the monthly journal To-day (Febru- 
ary 1884), as The Times refused to publish her letter. She once 
more focussed the debate on the sole question at issue: had Marx 
"lyingly inserted" that sentence or not? To this Mr. Sedley Taylor 
answered that "the question whether a particular sentence did 
or did not occur in Mr. Gladstone's speech" had been, in his 
opinion, "of very subordinate importance" in the Brentano-Marx 
controversy, "compared to the issue whether the quotation in 
dispute was made with the intention of conveying, or of pervert- 
ing Mr. Gladstone's meaning." He then admits that The Times 
report contains "a verbal contrariety"; but, if the context is right- 
ly interpreted, i.e., in the Gladstonian Liberal sense, it shows 
what Mr. Gladstone meant to say. (To-day, March, 1884.) The 
most comic point here is that our little Cambridge man now insists 
upon quoting the speech not from Hansard, as, according to the 
anonymous Brentano, it is "customary" to do, but from The 
Times report, which the same Brentano had characterised as 
"necessarily bungling." Naturally so, for in Hansard the vexatious 
sentence is missing. 

Eleanor Marx had no difficulty (in the same issue of To-day) 
in dissolving all this argumentation into thin air. Either Mr. 



PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION 31 

Taylor had read the controversy of 1872, in which case he was 
now making not only "lying insertions" but also "lying" suppres- 
sions; or he had not read it and ought to remain silent. In either 
case it was certain that he did not dare to maintain for a moment 
the accusation of his friend Brentano that Marx had made a 
"lying" addition. On the contrary, Marx, it now seems, had not 
lyingly added but suppressed an important sentence. But this same 
sentence is quoted on page 5 of the Inaugural Address, a few lines 
before the alleged "lying insertion." And as to the "contrariety" 
in Gladstone's speech, is it not Marx himself, who in "Capital," 
p. 618 (3rd edition, p. 672), note 105 [present edition, p. 
652, Note 3], refers to "the continual crying contradictions 
in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864"? Only he 
does not presume a la Mr. Sedley Taylor to resolve them into 
complacent Liberal sentiments. Eleanor Marx, in concluding 
her reply, finally sums up as follows: 

"Marx has not suppressed anything worth quoting, neither 
has he 'lyingly' added anything. But he has restored, rescued 
from oblivion, a particular sentence of one of Mr. Gladstone's 
speeches, a sentence which had indubitably been pronounced, but 
which somehow or other had found its way— out of Hansard." 

With that Mr. Sedley Taylor too had had enough, and the 
result of this whole professorial cobweb, spun out over two decades 
and two great countries, is that nobody has since dared to cast any 
other aspersion upon Marx's literary honesty; whilst Mr. Sedley 
Taylor, no doubt, will hereafter put as little confidence in the 
literary war bulletins of Herr Brentano as Herr Brentano will in 
the papal infallibility of Hansard. 

Frederick Engels 
London, June 25, 1890 



BOOK I 

CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



35 



PART I 

COMMODITIES AND MONEY 



CHAPTER T 

COMMODITIES 

SECTION 1.— THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY: 

USE-VALUE AND VALUE (THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE 

AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE) 

The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode 
of production prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumula- 
tion of commodities," 1 its unit being a single commodity. Our 
investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a com- 
modity. 

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a 
thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort 
or another. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, 
they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no differ- 
ence. 2 Neither are we here concerned to know how the object 
satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, 
or indirectly as means of production. 

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &amp;c, may be looked at 
from the two points of view of quality and quantity. It is an 
assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in 
various ways. To discover the various uses of things is the work 
of history. 3 So also is the establishment of socially-recognised 



1 Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie." Berlin, 1859, p. 3. 

2 "Desire implies want; it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural 
as hunger to the body.... The greatest number (of things) have their value 
from supplying the wants of the mind." Nicholas Barbon: "A Discourse Con- 
cerning Coining the New Money Lighter. In Answer to Mr. Locke's Con- 
siderations," «&amp;c, London, 1696, pp. 2, 3. 

3 'Tilings have an intrinsick vertue" (this is Barbon's special term lor 
value in use) "which in all places have the same vertue; as the loadstone to 
attract iron" (1. c, p. 6). The property which the magnet possesses of at- 
tracting iron, became of use only after by means oi that property the po- 
larity of the magnet had been discovered. 



36 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects. 
The diversity of these measures has its origin partly in the di- 
verse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention. 

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. x But this utility 
is not a thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of 
the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. 
A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so 
far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful. This 
property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour 
required to appropriate its useful qualities. When treating of 
use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, 
such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The 
use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special 
study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. 2 
Use-values become a reality only by use or consumption: they 
also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the 
social form of that wealth. In the form of society we are about to 
consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of ex- 
change-value. 

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantita- 
tive relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort 
are exchanged for those of another sort, 3 a relation constantly 
changing with time and place. Hence exchange-value appears 
to be something accidental and purely relative, and consequently 
an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably 
connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a contradiction 
in terms. 4 Let us consider the matter a little more closely. 



1 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the 
necessities, or serve the conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, "Some Con- 
siderations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest, 1691," in Works 
Edit. Lond., 1777, Vol. II., p. 28.) In English writers of the 17th century we 
frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense 
of exchange-value. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language 
that likes to use a Teutonic word for the actual thing, and a Romance word 
for its reflexion. 

2 In bourgeois societies the economic fictio juris prevails, that every 
one, as a buyer, possesses an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities. 

3 "La valeur consiste dans le rapport d'echange qui se trouve entre telle 
chose et telle autre, entre telle mesure d'une production, et telle mesure d'une 
autre." (Le Trosne: "De l'lnteret Social." Physiocrates. Ed. Daire. Paris, 
1846. P. 889.) 

4 "Nothing can have an intrinsick value." (N. Barbon, 1. c, p. 6); 
or as Butler says — 

"The value of a thing 
Is just as much as it will bring." 



COMMODITIES 37 



A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged 
for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &amp;c— in short, for other commodi- 
ties in the most different proportions. Instead of one exchange- 
value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many. But since x black- 
ing, y silk, or z gold, &amp;c, each represent the exchange-value 
of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &amp;c, must, 
as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or equal to 
each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given 
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, 
generally, is only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, 
of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it. 

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The pro- 
portions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those propor- 
tions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which 
a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: 
e.g., 1 quarter corn=xcwt. iron. What does this equation tell us? 
It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and 
x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common 
to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which 
in itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far 
as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third. 

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In 
order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we 
decompose them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself 
is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, 
namely, by half the product of the base into the altitude. In the 
same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable 
of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, 
of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity. 

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, 
a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. Such 
properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the 
utility of those commodities, make them use-values. But the 
exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a 
total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is just as 
good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity. 
Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if 
the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of 
equal value.... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is 
of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." 1 
As use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, 



1 N. Barbon, 1. c, p. 53 and 7. 



38 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

but as exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and 
consequently do not contain an atom of use-value. 

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of com- 
modities, they have only one common property left, that of being 
products of labour. But even the product of labour itself has un- 
dergone a change in our hands. If we make abstraction from its 
use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material 
elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see 
in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other useful thing. 
Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Neither can 
it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, 
the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive 
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products them- 
selves, we put out of sight both the useful character of the various 
kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that 
labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; 
all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour 
in the abstract. ' 

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; 
it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere con- 
gelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expend- 
ed without regard to the mode of its expenditure. All that these 
things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended 
in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. When 
looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them 
all, they are — Values. 

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their 
exchange-value manifests itself as something totally independent 
of their use-value. But if we abstract from their use-value, there 
remains their Value as defined above. Therefore, the common 
substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of commod- 
ities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. The progress 
of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only 
form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or 
be expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider the 
nature of value independently of this, its form. 

A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because 
human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised 
in it. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? 
Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the 
labour, contained in the article. The quantity of labour, however, 
is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its 
standard in weeks, days, and hours. 



COMMODITIES 39 



Some people might think that if the value of a commodity 
is determined by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more 
idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his 
commodity be, because more time would be required in its pro- 
duction. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, 
is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform la- 
bour-power. The total labour-power of society, which is embodied 
in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that 
society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour- 
power, composed though it be of innumerable individual units. 
Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the 
character of the average labour-power of society, and takes effect as 
such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no 
more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially 
necessary. The labour-time socially necessary is that required to 
produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and 
with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. 
The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced 
by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of 
yarn into cloth. The hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, 
continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the 
product of one hour of their labour represented after the change 
only half an hour's social labour, and consequently fell to one-half 
its former value. 

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the 
value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, 
or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. 1 Each 
individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as 
an average sample of its class. 2 Commodities, therefore, in which 
equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced 
in the same time, have the same value. The value of one commodity 
is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary for the 
production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the 



1 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged 
the one for another, is regulated by the quantity of labour necessarily re- 
quired, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some Thoughts on the 
Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &amp;c." 
Lond., p. 36.) This remarkable anonymous work, written in the last cen- 
tury, bears no date. It is clear, however, from internal evidence, that it ap- 
peared in the reign of George II. about 1739 or 1740. 

2 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement 
qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- 
stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 893.) 



40 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

other. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of 
congealed labour-time." 1 

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, 
if the labour-time required for its production also remained 
constant. But the latter changes with every variation in the 
productiveness of labour. This productiveness is determined by 
various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount 
of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of 
its practical application, the social organisation of production, 
the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by 
physical conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in 
favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfa- 
vourable, only in four. The same labour extracts from rich mines 
more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds are of very rare 
occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, 
on an average, a great deal of labour-time. Consequently much 
labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob doubts whether 
gold has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still 
more to diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce of 
the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, 
had not realised the price of one-and-a-half years' average produce 
of the sugar and coffee plantations of the same country, although 
the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented 
more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would 
embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. 
If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting 
carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. 
In general, the greater the productiveness of labour, the less is 
the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less 
is the amount of labour crystallised in that article, and the less is 
its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour, the 
greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, 
and the greater is its value. The value of a commodity, there- 
fore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the produc- 
tiveness, of the labour incorporated in it. 

A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is 
the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Such 
are air, virgin soil, uatural meadows, &amp;c. A thing can be useful, 
and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. 
Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own 
labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order 



1 K. Marx, 1. c, p. 6. 



COMMODITIES 41 



to produce the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but 
use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for others, 
without more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn 
for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. But neither the 
quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason 
of the fact that they had been produced for others. To become a 
commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it 
will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) 1 Lastly 
nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. If 
the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour 
does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value. 

SECTION 2.— THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER 
OF THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES 

At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex 
of two things — use-value and exchange-value. Later on, we saw 
also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so 
far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same 
characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use-values. I was 
the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature 
of the labour contained in commodities. As this point is the 
pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy turns, 
we must go more into detail. 

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of 
linen, and let the former be double the value of the latter, so that, 
if 10 yards of linen =W, the coat=2W. 

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its 
existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the 
nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, 
subject, means, and result. The labour, whose utility is thus 
represented by the value in use of its product, or which mani- 
fests itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful 
labour. In this connexion we consider only its useful effect. 

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- 
values, so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, 
tailoring and weaving. Were these two objects not qualitatively 
different, not produced respectively by labour of different quality, 
they could not stand to each other in the relation of commodities. 



1 [Note in the 4th German edition: I am inserting the parenthesis 
because its omission has often given rise to the misunderstanding that every 
product that is consumed by some one other than its producer is considered 
in Marx a commodity. — F. E.\ 



42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use-value is not exchanged 
for another of the same kind. 

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond 
as many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the 
order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the 
social division of labour. This division of labour is a necessary 
condition for the production of commodities, but it does not 
follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a 
necessary condition for the division of labour. In the primitive 
Indian community there is social division of labour, without 
production of commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, 
in every factory the labour is divided according to a system, but 
this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually 
exchanging their individual products. Only such products can 
become commodities with regard to each other, as result from 
different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independ- 
ently and for the account of private individuals. 

To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there 
is contained useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite 
kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use-values cannot con- 
front each other as commodities, unless the useful labour em- 
bodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. In a 
community, the produce of which in general takes the form of 
commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this 
qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are 
carried on independently by individual producers, each on 
their own account, develops into a complex system, a social 
division of labour. 

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his 
customer, in either case it operates as a use-value. Nor is the 
relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered 
by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special 
trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour. 
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race 
made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becom- 
ing a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of 
material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, 
must invariably owe their existence to a special productive activ- 
ity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates 
particular nature-given materials to particular human wants. 
So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, 
it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, 
for the existence of the human race; it is an eternal nature- 



COMMODITIES 43 



imposed necessity, without which there can be no material ex- 
changes between man and Nature, and therefore no life. 

The use-values, coat, linen, &amp;c, i.e., the bodies of commodi- 
ties, are combinations of two elements— matter and labour. 
If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a mate- 
rial substratum is always left, which is furnished by Nature 
without the help of man. The latter can work only as Nature does, 
that is by changing the form of matter. 1 Nay more, in this work of 
changing the form he is constantly helped by natural forces. We 
see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of 
use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour 
is its father and the earth its mother. 

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use- 
value to the value of commodities. 

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the 
linen. But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the 
present does not concern us. We bear in mind, however, that 
if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. 
of linen must have the same value as one coat. So far as they are 
values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objec- 
tive expressions of essentially identical labour. But tailoring and 
weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There are, 
however, states of society in which one and the same man does 
tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms 
of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same indi- 
vidual, and no special and fixed functions of different persons; 
just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the trousers 
which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour 
of one and the same individual. Moreover, we see at a glance that, 
in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in 
accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the 
form of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change 



1 Tutti i fenomeni dell' universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell' 
uomo, ovvero delle universali leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale 
creazione, ma unicamente di una modi ficazi one della materia. Accostare e 
separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando 
l'idea della riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, 
although Verri in this passage of his controversy with the Physiocrats is 
not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di ricchezze 
se la terra, l'aria e l'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano. come se colla 
mano dell'uomo il glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni 
pezzetti di metallo si organizzino a formare una ripetizione."— Pietro 
Veri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] inCus- 
todi's edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. XV., p. 22. 



44 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it 
must. 

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, 
viz., the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the ex- 
penditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though 
qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive 
expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this 
sense are human labour. They are but two different modes of ex- 
pending human labour-power. Of course, this labour-power, 
which remains the same under all its modifications, must have 
attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended 
in a multiplicity of modes. But the value of a commodity repre- 
sents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human la- 
bour in general. And just as in society, a general or a banker plays 
a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, * 
so here with mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple 
labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on ^n average, apart 
from any special development, exists in the organism of every 
ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies 
in character in different countries and at different times, but in 
a particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as 
simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, 
a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a greater 
quantity of simple labour. Experience shows that this reduction 
is constantly being made. A commodity may be the product of 
the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the 
product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity 
of the latter labour alone. 2 The different proportions in which 
different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their 
standard, are established by a social process that goes on behind 
the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed 
by custom. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account 
every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we 
do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction. 

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, 
we abstract from their different use-values, so it is with the labour 
represented by those values: we disregard the difference between 
its useful forms, weaving and tailoring. As the use-values, coat 



1 Comp. Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840. P. 250, § 190. 

2 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wages or 
value that the labourer gets for a given labour-time, but of the value of the 
commodity in which that labour-time is materialised. Wages is a category 
that, as yet, has no existence at the present stage of our investigation. 



COMMODITIES 45 



and linen, are combinations of special productive activities with 
cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other 
hand, mere homogeneous congelations of undifferentiated labour, 
so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by 
virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as 
being expenditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weav- 
ing are necessary factors in the creation of the use-values, coat 
and linen, precisely because these two kinds of labour are of differ- 
ent qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from their 
special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality 
of being human labour, do tailoring and weaving form the sub- 
stance of the values of the same articles. 

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values 
of definite magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat 
is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. Whence this 
di (Terence in their values? It is owing to the fact that the linen 
contains only half as much labour as the coat, and consequently, 
that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been 
expended during twice the time necessary for the production of 
the former. 

While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour con- 
tained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference 
to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced 
to human labour pure and simple. In the former case, it is a ques- 
tion of How and What, in the latter of How much? How long a 
time? Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents 
only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all 
commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal 
in value. 

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful 
labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, 
the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their 
number. If one coat represents x days' labour, two coats represent 
2x days' labour, and so on. But assume that the duration of the 
labour necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled or 
halved. In the first case, one coat is worth as much as two coats 
were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as 
one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same 
service as before, and the useful labour embodied in it remains 
of the same quality. But the quantity of labour spent on its 
production has altered. 

An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of 
material wealth. With two coats two men can be clothed, with 



46 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of 
material wealth may correspond to a simultaneous fall in the mag- 
nitude of its value. This antagonistic movement has its origin 
in the two-fold character of labour. Productive power has reference, 
of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the efficacy 
of any special productive activity during a given time being de- 
pendent on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, 
a more or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the 
rise or fall of its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in 
this productiveness affects the labour represented by value. 
Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms 
of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that la- 
bour, so soon as we make abstraction from those concrete useful 
forms. However then productive power may vary, the same labour, 
exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts 
of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, dif- 
ferent quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power 
rise, fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which 
increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the 
quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish 
the total value of this increased quantity of use-values, provided 
such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their 
production; and vice versa. 

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an 
expenditure of human labour-power, and in its character of iden- 
tical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of 
commodities. On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure 
of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim, 
and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces 
use-values. * 



1 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real 
measure, by which at all times the value of all commodities can be esti- 
mated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour must at 
all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. In his nor- 
mal state of health, strength, and activity, and with the average degree of 
skill that he may possess, he must always give up the same portion of his 
rest, his freedom, and his happiness." ("Wealth of Nations," b. I. ch.V.) On 
the one hand, Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determi- 
nation of value by means of the quantity of labour expended in the produc- 
tion of commodities, with the determination of the values of commodities 
by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal 
quantities of labour have always the same value On the other hand, he has 
a presentiment, that labour, so far as it manifests itself in the value of com- 
modities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats this ex- 
penditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the 



COMMODITIES 47 



SECTION 3.— THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE- VALUE 

Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, 
articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &amp;c. This is their 
plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodities, 
only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utility, 
and, at the same time, depositories of value. They manifest 
themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of com- 
modities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or 
natural form, and a value-form. 

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect 
from Dame Quickly, that we don't know "where to have it." 
The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse mate- 
riality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its 
composition. Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, 
as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems 
impossible to grasp it. If, however, we bear in mind that the 
value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they 
acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions or em- 
bodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human labour, 
it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest 
itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity. In fact 
we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of com- 
modities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. 
We must now return to this form under which value first appeared 
to us. 

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities 
have a value-form common to them all, and presenting a marked 
contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use-values. I mean 
their money-form. Here, however, a task is set us, the perform- 
ance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois 
economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of 



same time the normal activity of living beings. But then, he has the modern 
wage-labourer in his eye. Much more aptly, the anonymous predecessor 
of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. 39, says "one man has employed 
himself a week in providing this necessary of life .. and he that gives him some 
other in exchange, cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equiva- 
lent, than by computing what cost him just as much labour and time; which 
in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing for a 
time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." 
(1. c, p. 39.) [The English language has the advantage of possessing different 
words for the two aspects of labour here considered. The labour which cre- 
ates Use-Value, and counts qualitatively is Work, as distinguished from 
Labour; that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour 
as distinguished from Work. — F. E.\ 



48 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

developing the expression of value implied in the value-relation 
of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible outline, 
to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we shall, at the same 
time, solve the riddle presented by money. 

The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commod- 
ity to some one other commodity of a different kind. Hence the 
relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with 
the simplest expression of the value of a single commodity. 

A. Elementary or Accidental form of value 

x commodity A=y commodity B, or 
x commodity A is worth y commodity B. 
20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 
20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat. 

/. The two poles of the expression of value: 
Relative form and Equivalent form 

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this 
elementary form. Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty. 

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example 
the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. The 
linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the mate- 
rial in which that value is expressed. The former plays an active, 
the latter a passive, part. The value of the linen is represented as 
relative value, or appears in relative form. The coat officiates as 
equivalent, or appears in equivalent form. 

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately 
connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the 
expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, 
antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. They are 
allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into 
relation by that expression. It is not possible to express the value 
of linen in linen. 20 yards of linen =20 yards of linen is no ex- 
pression of value. On the contrary, such an equation merely says 
that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a 
definite quantity of the use-value linen. The value of the linen can 
therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other com- 
modity. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, 
therefore, the presence of some other commodity— here the coat- 
under the form of an equivalent. On the other hand, the commodity 
that figures as the equivaleni caunot at the same time assume the 



COMMODITIES 49 



relative form. That second commodity is not the one whose value 
is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as the material in 
which the value of the first commodity is expressed. 

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen=l coat, or 20 
yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation: 1 
coat =20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. 
But, in that case, I must reverse the equation, in order to express 
the value of the coat relatively; and, so soon as I do that, the linen 
becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. A single commodity 
cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the same expres- 
sion of value, both forms. The very polarity of these forms makes 
them mutually exclusive. 

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or 
the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely upon its accidental 
position in the expression of value— that is, upon whether it is 
the commodity whose value is being expressed or the commod- 
ity in which value is being expressed. 

2. The Relative form of value 
(a.) The nature and import of this form 

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value 
of a commodity lies hidden in the value-relation of two commodi- 
ties, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart 
from its quantitative aspect. The usual mode of procedure is gen- 
erally the reverse, and in the value-relation nothing is seen but 
the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of 
commodities that are considered equal to each other. It is apt to 
be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be com- 
pared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed 
in terms of the same unit. It is only as expressions of such a unit 
that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensu- 
rable. l 

Whether 20 yards of linen =1 coat or =20 coats or=x coats— 
that is, whether a given quantity of linen is worth few or many 



i The few economists, amongst whom is S. Bailey, who have occupied 
themselves with the analysis of the form of value, have been unable to arrive 
at any result, first, because they confuse the form of value with value itseli; 
and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, 
they exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect oi the ques- 
tion. "The command of quantity ... constitutes value." ("Money and its 
Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. 11. By S. Bailey.) 



50 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

coats, every such statement implies that the linen and coats, as 
magnitudes of value, are expressions of the same unit, things of 
the same kind. Linen = coat is the basis of the equation. 

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus 
assumed, do not play the same part. It is only the value of the linen 
that is expressed. And how? By its reference to the coat as its 
equivalent, as something that can be exchanged for it. In this 
relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value em- 
bodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. On the other 
hand, the linen's own value comes to the front, receives independ- 
ent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable 
with the coat as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with 
the coat. To borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid 
is a different substance from propyl formate. Yet both are made 
up of the same chemical substances, carbon (G), hydrogen (H), and 
oxygen (0), and that, too, in like proportions— namely, C 4 H 8 2 . 
If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first 
place, propyl formate would be, in this relation, merely a form of 
existence of G 4 H 8 2 ; and in the second place, we should be stating 
that butyric acid also consists of C 4 H 8 2 . Therefore, by thus 
equating the two substances, expression would be given to their 
chemical composition, while their different physical forms would 
be neglected. 

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations 
of human labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, 
to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form 
apart from their bodily form. It is otherwise in the value- 
relation of one commodity to another. Here, the one stands 
forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the 
other. 

By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate 
the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter. Now, 
it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete 
labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the linen. 
But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring 
to that which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their 
common character of human labour. In this roundabout way, 
then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves 
value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and, conse- 
quently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of equiv- 
alence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings 
into relief the specific character of value-creating labour, and 
this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour 



COMMODITIES 51 



embodied in the different kinds of commodities to their common 
quality of human labour in the abstract. 1 

There is, however, something else required beyond the ex- 
pression of the specific character of the labour of which the 
value of the linen consists. Human labour-power in motion, or 
human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. It becomes 
value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form 
of some object. In order to express the value of the linen as a 
congelation of human labour, that value must be expressed 
as having objective existence, as being a something materially 
different from the linen itself, and yet a something common to 
the linen and all other commodities. The problem is already 
solved. 

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation 
of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, 
as something of the same kind, because it is value. In this position 
it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable 
bodily form represents value. Yet the coat itself, the body of the 
commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A coat as such no more 
tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of. 
This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the 
coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a 
man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform counts for more than 
when in mufti. 

In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the 
shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended. Human 
labour is therefore accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is 
a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not 
let this fact show through. And as equivalent of the linen in the 
value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore 
as embodied value, as a body that is value. A, for instance, cannot 
be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's 
eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every 



1 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. 
Petty, who saw through the nature of value, says: "Trade in general being 
nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all things 
is ... most justly measured by labour" ("The works of B. Franklin, &amp;c," 
edited by Sparks. Boston, 1836, Vol. II., p. 267.) Franklin is unconscious 
that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he makes abstrac- 
tion from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces 
them all to equal human labour. But although ignorant of this, yet he says 
it. He speaks first of "the one labour," then of "the other labour," and finally 
of "labour " without further qualification, as the substance of the value of 
everything. 



52 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

new father of the people, changes its features, hair, and many other 
things besides. 

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equiva- 
lent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. The value 
of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the 
commodity coat, the value of one by the use-value of the other. 
As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different from 
the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the ap- 
pearance of a coat. Thus the linen acquires a value-form different 
from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made mani- 
fest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a 
Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God. 

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commod- 
ities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon 
as it comes into communication with another commodity, the 
coat. Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with which 
alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. In order to tell 
us that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character 
of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as it is worth as 
much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same la- 
bour as the linen. In order to inform us that its sublime reality 
as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value 
has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the 
linen is value, it and the coat are as like as two peas. We may 
here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Heb- 
rew, many other more or less correct dialects. The German "Wert- 
sein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less striking man- 
ner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the 
equating of commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own 
mode of expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe. 

By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our 
equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value- 
form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a 
mirror to the value of commodity A. 1 By putting itself in rela- 
tion with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the matter 
of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts 



1 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes 
into the world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian 
philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and recognises 
himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by 
first comparing himself with Paul as being of like kind. And thereby Paul, 
just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the type of 
the genus homo. 



COMMODITIES 53 



the value in use, B, into the substance in which to express its, 
A's, own value. The value of A, thus expressed in the use-value of 
B, has taken the form of relative value. 

(b.) QuantltatiTe determination of Relative value 

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a 
useful object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 
lbs. of coffee. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a 
definite quantity of human labour. The value-form must therefore 
not only express value generally, but also value in definite quan- 
tity. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity 
B, of the linen to the coat, not only is the latter, as value in gen- 
eral, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite quantity 
of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity 
(20 yards) of linen. 

The equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen 
are worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value-sub- 
stance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two com- 
modities have each cost the same amount of labour of the same 
quantity of labour-time. But the labour-time necessary for the 
production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change 
in the productiveness of weaving or tailoring. We have now to 
consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect 
of the relative expression of value. 

I. Let the value of the linen vary, x that of the coat remaining 
constant. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing 
soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be 
doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of 
the equation, 20 yards of linen=l coat, we should have 20 yards 
of linen=2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the 
labour-time embodied in 20 yards of linen. If, on the other hand, 
in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be re- 
duced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. 
Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = l A coat. The 
relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in com- 
modity B, rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of 
B being supposed constant. 

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value 
of the coat varies. If, under these circumstances, in consequence, 
for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary 

1 Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in sense 
of value determined as to quantity, or of magnitude of value. 



54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

for the production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 
20 yards of linen =1 coat, 20 yards of linen =^2 coat. If, on the 
other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards 
of linen =2 coats. Hence, if the value of commodity A remain 
constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises and 
falls inversely as the value of B. 

If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that the 
same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from to- 
tally opposite causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen 
=1 coat, becomes 20 yards of linen=2 coats, either, because 
the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the 
coat has fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen 
= % coat, either, because the value of the linen has fallen by one- 
half, or because the value of the coat has doubled. 

III. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively neces- 
sary for the production of the linen and the coat vary simul- 
taneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. In 
this case 20 yards of linen continue equal to 1 coat, however 
much their values may have altered. Their change of value is 
seen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose 
value has remained constant. If the values of all commodities 
rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their 
relative values would remain unaltered. Their real change of value 
would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of com- 
modities produced in a given time. 

IV. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production 
of the linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these com- 
modities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at 
unequal rates, or in opposite directions, or in other ways. The 
effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative 
value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II., 
and III. 

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither un- 
equivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, 
that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative 
value. The relative value of a commodity may vary, although its 
value remains constant. Its relative value may remain constant, 
although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations 
in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression 
by no means necessarily correspond in amount. * 



1 This incongruity between the magnitude ot value and its relative 
expression has, with customary ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar econ- 



COMMODITIES 55 



3. The Equivalent form of value 

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing 
its value in the use-value of a commodity differing in kind (the 
coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form 
of value, namely that of the equivalent. The commodity linen 
manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, 
without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily 
form, is equated to the linen. The fact that the latter therefore 
has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly ex- 
changeable with it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity 
is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly ex- 
changeable with other commodities. 

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent 
of another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the 
characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, 
we are far from knowing in what proportion the two are ex- 
changeable. The value of the linen being given in magnitude, that 
proportion depends on the value of the coat. Whether the coat 
serves as the equivalent and the linen as relative value, or the 
linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magni- 
tude of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value- 
form, by the labour-time necessary for its production. But when- 
ever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of 
equivalent, its value acquires no quantitative expression; on the 



omists. For example — "Once admit that A tails, because B, with which, 
it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the mean-' 
time on A, and your general principle of value falls to the ground.... If he 
[Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B, B falls in value 
relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand propo- 
sition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour em- 
bodied in it; for if a change in the cost of A alters not only its own value in 
relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively 
to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to 
produce B, then not only the doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that 
the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its value, but also 
that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value." (J Broadhurst: 
"Political Economy," London, 1842, pp. 11 and 14.) 

10 10 10 
Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the tractions-^, -^, j-^r, 

&amp;c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, 
its magnitude relatively to the numbers 20. 50, 100, &amp;c, continually dimin- 
ishes. Therefore the great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, 
such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity is contained in it, 
falls to the ground.— [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, 
pp. 80-81, note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar Economy."—/?'. E.) 



56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

contrary, the commodity coat now figures only as a definite 
quantity of some article. 

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. 
Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, 
because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an 
embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices 
to express the definite quantity of value in the linen. Two coats 
may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, 
but they can never express the quantity of their own value. A 
superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation 
of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity 
of some article, of some use-value, has misled Bailey, as also many 
others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression 
of value, merely a quantitative relation. The truth being, that 
when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative determi- 
nation of its value is expressed. 

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form 
of the equivalent, is this: use-value becomes the form of manifes- 
tation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value. 

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. 
But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any 
commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into 
a value-relation with it, and then only within the limits of this 
relation. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of equiva- 
lent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expres- 
sion of its own value, every commodity is compelled to choose 
some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use- 
value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as 
the form of its own value. 

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material 
substances, as use-values, will serve to illustrate this point. A 
sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: 
but we can neither see nor touch this weight. We then take various 
pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand. 
The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, 
than is the sugar-loaf. Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar- 
loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the 
iron. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing 
nothing but weight. A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as 
the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation 
to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of 
weight. This part is played by the iron only within this relation, 
into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be 



COMMODITIES 57 



determined, enters with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they 
could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not 
serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When we throw 
both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both 
the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, 
they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as a measure 
of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, 
in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation 
to the linen, represents value alone. 

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the expres- 
sion of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural property 
common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the 
expression of value of the linen, represents a non-natural property 
of both, something purely social, namely, their value. 

Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, 
for example — expresses the value of that commodity, as being 
something wholly different from its substance and properties, as 
being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself 
indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With 
the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very essence of 
this form is that the material commodity itself — the coat — just 
as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value 
by Nature itself. Of course this holds good only so long as the 
value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of 
equivalent to the linen. x Since, however, the properties of a thing 
are not the result of its relations to other things, but only manifest 
themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed with 
its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, 
just as much by Nature as it is endowed with the property of 
being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. Hence the enigmat- 
ical character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice 
of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely 
developed, confronts him in the shape of money. He then seeks 
to explain away the mystical character of gold and silver, by sub- 
stituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting, 
with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible com- 
modities which at one time or another have played the part of 
equivalent. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple 



1 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-cate- 
sories, form a very curious class. For instance, one man is king only be- 
cause other men stand in the relation of subjects to him. They, on the con 
trary, imagine that they are subjects because he is king. 



58 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

expression of value, such as 20 yds. of linen =1 coat, already pro- 
pounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our solution. 

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, 
figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, 
and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful 
concrete labour. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the 
medium for expressing abstract human labour. If on the one hand 
the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human 
labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring which is actually 
embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that 
abstract labour is realised. In the expression of value of the linen, 
the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making clothes, but 
in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and 
therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour indistin- 
guishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In order to 
act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect 
nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour 
generally. 

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is 
expended. Both, therefore, possess the general property of being 
human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in 
the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect 
alone. There is nothing mysterious in this. But in the expression 
of value there is a complete turn of the tables. For instance, how 
is the fact to be expressed that weaving creates the value of the 
linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of 
its general property of being human labour? Simply by opposing 
to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this 
instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product 
of weaving. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct 
expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of 
labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human 
labour generally. 

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that 
concrete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, ab- 
stract human labour, manifests itself. 

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks 
as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human la- 
bour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and 
therefore with that embodied in the linen. Consequently, al- 
though, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour 
of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour 
directly social in its character. This is the reason why it results 



COMMODITIES 59 



in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. We 
have then a third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, 
that the labour of private individuals takes the form of its oppo- 
site, labour directly social in its form. 

The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will 
become more intelligible if we go back to the great thinker who 
was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, 
or Nature, and amongst them also the form of value. I mean Aris- 
totle. 

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money-form 
of commodities is only the further development of the simple 
form of value — i.e., of the expression of the value of one com- 
modity in some other commodity taken at random; for he says — 

5 beds=lhouse (xXfvai ttsvts avii oixizq,) 

is not to be distinguished from 

5 beds=so much money. 

(x'/.ivat ttsvts dvii — ojov at ttsvts xX(vat) 

He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to 
this expression makes it necessary that the house should quali- 
tatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such 
an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be 
compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Ex- 
change," he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equal- 
ity not without commensurability" (out' igottj; jjtj obarfc aujAjAsipiac). 
Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further anal- 
ysis of the form of value. "It is, however, in reality, impossible 
(it; jjlsv gov akrfisia dSovaiov), that such unlike things can be com- 
mensurable"— i.e., qualitatively equal. Such an equalisation can 
only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently 
only "a makeshift for practical purposes." 

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to 
his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. 
What is that equal something, that common substance, which 
admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? Such 
a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not? 
Compared with the beds, the house does represent something 
equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both 
in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour. 

There was, however, an important fact which prevented 
Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is 



60 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, 
and consequently as labour of equal quality. Greek society was 
founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, 
the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. The secret of 
the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal 
and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in 
general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality 
has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice. This, 
however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of 
the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which, 
consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, 
is that of owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's 
genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the 
expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. 
The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone 
prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the 
bottom of this equality. 

4. The Elementary form of value considered as a whole 

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained 
in the equation, expressing its value-relation to another com- 
modity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the same. 
The value of commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the 
fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. Its 
value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite 
quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A. In 
other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent 
and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange-value. 
When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common par- 
lance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange- 
value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. A commodity is a 
use-value or object of utility, and a value. It manifests itself as 
this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an 
independent form — viz., the form of exchange-value. It never 
assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value 
or exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind. 
When once we know this, such a mode of expression does no harm; 
it simply serves as an abbreviation. 

Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the 
value of a commodity originates in the nature of value, and not 
that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their ex- 
pression as exchange-value. This, however, is the delusion as well 



COMMODITIES 61 



of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh, l 
and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of 
Free-trade, such as Bastiat. The mercantilists lay special stress on 
the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and consequent- 
ly on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full 
perfection in money. The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must 
get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most 
stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. 
For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of 
value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange- 
relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. 
Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confused 
ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful 
cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened 
Free-trade bagmen. 

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms 
of B, contained in the equation expressing the value-relation of 
A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form 
of A figures only as a use-value, the bodily form of B only as the 
form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast existing inter- 
nally in each commodity between use-value and value, is, there- 
fore, made evident externally by two commodities being placed 
in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it 
is sought to express, figures directly as a mere use-value, while 
the commodity in which that value is to be expressed, figures di- 
rectly as mere exchange- value. Hence the elementary form of 
value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast 
contained in that commodity, between use-value and value, 
becomes apparent. 

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use- 
value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's 
development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., 
at the epoch when the labour spent on the production of a useful 
article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of 
that article, i.e., as its value. It therefore follows that the elemen- 
tary value-form is also the primitive form under which a product 
of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the grad- 
ual transformation of such products into commodities, proceeds 
pari passu with the development of the value-form. 



1 F. L. A. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, "Du gouvernement 
considere dans ses rapports avec le commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles 
Ganilh, "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique," 2nd ed., Paris, 1821. 



62 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary 
form of value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of 
metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price-form. 

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any 
other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the 
use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of 
exchange with a single different commodity, B; but it is still 
far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative 
proportionality, to all commodities. To the elementary relative 
value-form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equiv- 
alent form of one other commodity. Thus, in the relative expres- 
sion of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equiva- 
lent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single 
commodity, the linen. 

Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy 
transition into a more complete form. It is true that by means 
of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes 
expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity. But 
that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or 
anything else. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation 
with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, 
different elementary expressions of value. * The number of such 
possible expressions is limited only by the number of the differ- 
ent kinds of commodities distinct from it. The isolated expres- 
sion of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged 
to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value. 

B. Total or Expanded form of value 

z Com. A=u Com. B or=v Com. G or=w Com. D or=x Com. 

E or=&amp;c. 
(20 yards of linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. tea or =40 lbs. coffee or = 
1 quarter corn or =2 ounces gold or=y ton iron or =&amp;c.) 

J . The Expanded Relative form of value 

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is 
now expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the 
world of commodities. Every other commodity now becomes 



1 In Homer, tor instance, the value of an article is expressed in a se- 
ries oi different things. II. VII. 472-475. 



COMMODITIES 



63 



a mirror of the linen's value. 1 It is thus, that for the first time, 
this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of un- 
differentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, now 
stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with 
every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, wheth- 
er tailoring, ploughing, mining, &amp;c, and no matter, therefore, 
whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. The linen, by 
virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, 
no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the 
whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen of 
that world. At the same time, the interminable series of value 
equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it 
is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, 
of use-value it appears. 

In the first form, 20 yds. of linen =1 coat, it might, for ought 
that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two com- 
modities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second 
form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that 
determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental 
appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in mag- 
nitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in number- 
less different commodities, the property of as many different own- 
ers. The accidental relation between two individual commodity- 
owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange 
of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; 
but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which 
controls their exchange proportions. 



1 For this reason, we can speak of the coat-value of the linen when 
its value is expressed in coats, or of its corn-value when expressed in corn, 
and so on. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in the use-values, 
coat, corn, &amp;c, is the value of the linen. "The value of any commodity de- 
noting its relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... corn-value, cloth- 
value, according to the commodity with which it is compared; and hence 
there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as there 
are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nomi- 
nal." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: 
chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers." By the 
author of "Essays on the Formation, &amp;c, of Opinions." London, 1825, 
p. 39.) S. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its 
day created much stir in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the 
various relative expressions of one and the same value, he had proved the 
impossibility of any determination of the. concept of value. However narrow 
his own views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious 
defects in the Ricardian Theory, is proved by the animosity with which he 
was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review for example. 



04 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

2. The particular Equivalent form 

Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &amp;c, figures 
in the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, con- 
sequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of 
these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one 
out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds 
of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now 
as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, 
of undifferentiated human labour. 

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value 

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete 
because the series representing it is interminable. The chain of 
which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment 
to be lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into 
existence and furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. 
In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and 
independent expressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, 
the relative value of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in 
this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value- 
form, different in every case, and consisting of an interminable 
series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded relative 
value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. 
Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular 
equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the 
whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding 
the others. In the same way, also, the special, concrete, useful 
kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is pre- 
sented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an 
exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter, 
indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its mani- 
fold, particular, concrete forms. But, in that case, its expression 
in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity. 

The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but 
the sum of the elementary relative expressions or equations of the 
first kind, such as 

20 yards of linen=l coat 

20 yards of linen=10 lbs. of tea, etc. 

Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation, 

1 coat =20 yards of linen 
10 lbs. of tea =20 yards of linen, etc. 



COMMODITIES 55 



In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other 
commodities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other 
commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of 
the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express 
the value of their various commodities in one and the same third 
commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of 
linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. of tea, etc., that is to say, if "we give 
expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, 
we get, 

C. The General form of \a!ue 

1 coat 

10 lbs. of tea 

40 lbs. of coffee 

1 quarter of corn L =20 yards of linen 



2 ounces of gold 
*/ 2 a ton of iron 
x com. A., etc. J 



A The altered character of the form of value 

All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary 
form, because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in 
one and the same commodity. This form of value is elementary 
and the same for all, therefore general. 

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a com- 
modity as something distinct from its use-value or material form. 

The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: — 
1 coat =20 yards of linen, 10 lbs. of tea =% a ton of iron. The value of 
the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be 
equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are 
linen and iron. This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the 
first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into 
commodities by accidental and occasional exchanges. 

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner 
than the first, the value of a commodity from its use-value; for 
the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible 
shapes with the bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to 
iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself, the 
coat. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to 
all is directly excluded; for, in the equation of value of each com- 
modity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of 



66 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



equivalents. The expanded form of value comes into actual ex- 
istence for the first time so soon as a particular product of labour, 
such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, ex- 
changed for various other commodities. 

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of 
the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity 
set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents 
to us their values by means of their equality with linen. The 
value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, 
not only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other 
use-values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed as that 
which is common to all commodities. By this form, commodities 
are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one 
another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values. 

The two earlier forms either express the value of each com- 
modity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in 
a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, 
the special business of each single commodity to find an expression 
for its value, and this it does without the help of the others. 
These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts 
of equivalents. The general form of value, C, results from the joint 
action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. A 
commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all 
other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values 
in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow 
suit. It thus becomes evident that, since the existence of commodities 
as values is purely social, this social existence can be expressed 
by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently 
that the form of their value must be a socially recognised form. 

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only 
as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values 
whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the 
magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, the linen, 
those magnitudes are also compared with each other. For instance, 
10 lbs. of tea =20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. of coffee =20 yards 
of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs. of tea =40 lbs. of coffee. In other words, 
there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee only one-fourth as much sub- 
stance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. of tea. 

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole 
world of commodities, converts the single commodity that is 
excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — 
here the linen— into the universal equivalent. The bodily form 
of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the values 



COMMODITIES 67 



of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable 
with all and every of them. The substance linen becomes the vis- 
ible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human 
labour. Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individ- 
uals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in consequence 
a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds 
of labour. The innumerable equations of which the general form 
of value is composed, equate in turn the labour embodied in the 
linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus 
convert weaving into the general form of manifestation of undiffer- 
entiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the 
values of commodities is presented not only under its negative 
aspect, under which abstraction is made from every concrete 
form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive 
nature is made to reveal itself expressly. The general value-form 
is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their common 
character of being human labour generally, of being the expendi- 
ture of human labour-power. 

The general value-form, which represents all products of 
labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, 
shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the 
world of commodities. That form consequently makes it indispu- 
tably evident that in the world of commodities the character 
possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its 
specific social character. 

2. The interdependent development of the Relative form 
of value, and of the Equivalent form 

The degree of development of the relative form of value 
corresponds to that of the equivalent form. But we must bear 
in. mind that the development of the latter is only the expres- 
sion and result of the development of the former. 

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one com- 
modity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. 
The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of 
the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, 
endows those other commodities with the character of particu- 
lar equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a particular kind 
of commodity acquires the character of universal equivalent, 
because all other commodities make it the material in which 
they uniformly express their value. 

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the 



68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

equivalent form, the two poles of the value-form, is developed 
concurrently with that form itself. 

The first form, 20 yds. of linen =one coat, already contains 
this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. According as we read 
this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the 
linen and the coat are different. In the one case the relative 
value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the 
relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. In this first 
form of value, therefore, it is difficult to grasp the polar contrast. 

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can 
completely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this 
expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities 
are, with respect to it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the 
equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, 
without altering its general character, and converting it from 
the expanded form of value into the general form of value. 

Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a 
general social relative form of value, because, and in so far as, 
thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded 
from the equivalent form. A single commodity, the linen, appears 
therefore to have acquired the character of direct exchangeability 
with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this charac- 
ter is denied to every other commodity. L 

The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on 
the other hand, excluded from the relative value-form. If the 
linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, 



1 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and uni- 
versal exchangeability is, so to speak, a polar one, and as intimately con- 
nected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as 
the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. It may 
therefore be imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this 
character impressed upon them, just as it can be imagined that all Catholics 
can be popes together. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the 
petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra 
of human freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences 
resulting from this character of commodities not being directly exchange- 
able, should be removed. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philis- 
tine Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not 
possess even the merit of originality. Long before his time, the task was at- 
tempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and others. But, for all 
that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the 
name of "science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word 
science, than that of Proudhon, for 

"wo Begriffe fehlen, 
Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein." 



COMMODITIES 



69 



were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, 
it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then 
have 20 yds. of linen = 20 yds. of linen; this tautology expresses 
neither value, nor magnitude of value. In order to express the 
relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse 
the form G. This equivalent has no relative form of value in com- 
mon with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed 
by a never ending series of other commodities. Thus, the ex- 
panded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the 
specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity. 

3. Transition from the General form of value to the Money-form 

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. 
It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. On the other 
hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the univer- 
sal equivalent form (form G), this is only because and in so far 
as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities 
as their equivalent, and that by their own act. And from the mo- 
ment that this exclusion becomes finally restricted to one particu- 
lar commodity, from that moment only, the general form of rel- 
ative value of the world of commodities obtains real consistence 
and general social validity. 

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equiv- 
alent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money- 
commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special social 
function of that commodity, and consequently its social monop- 
oly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the uni- 
versal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, 
figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in form C, ex- 
press in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place 
has been attained by one in particular— namely, gold. If, then, 
in form G we replace the linen by gold, we get, 

B. The Money-form 

20 yards of linen = "| 

1 coat = 

10 lbs. of tea = ] 

40 lbs. of coffee = [» 2 ounces of gold 

1 qr. of corn = I 
I / 1 a ton of iron = 



x commodity A = J 



70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to 
form C, the changes are fundamental. On the other hand, there 
is no difference between forms G and D, except that, in the latter, 
gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold 
is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal equiva- 
lent. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of 
direct and universal exchangeability— in other words, that 
the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, be- 
come finally identified with the substance, gold. 

Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities 
only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple 
commodity. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of 
serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated 
exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of others. 
Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal 
equivalent. So soon as it monopolises this position in the expres- 
sion of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money 
commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become dis- 
tinct from form C, and the general form of value become changed 
into the money-form. 

The elementary expression of the relative value of a single 
commodity, such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as 
gold, that plays the part of money, is the price-form of that com- 
modity. The price-form of the linen is therefore 

20 yards of linen =2 ounces of gold, or, if 2 ounces of gold when 
coined are £2, 20 yards of linen =£2. 

The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, con- 
sists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, 
and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form G. 
The latter is deducible from form B, the expanded form of value, 
the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A, 
20 yards of linen =1 coat or x commodity A =y commodity B. 
The simple commodity-form is therefore the germ of the money- 
form. 



COMMODITIES 71 



SECTION 4.— THE FETISHISM OF COMMODITIES 
AND THE SECRET THEREOF 

A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and 
easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a 
very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and 
theological niceties. So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing 
mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of 
view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, 
or from the point that those properties are the product of human 
labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, 
changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such 
a way as to make them useful to him. The form of wood, for 
instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, 
the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood. 
But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into 
something transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the 
ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on 
its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, 
far more wonderful than "table-turning" ever was. 

The mystical character of commodities does not originate, 
therefore, in their use-value. Just as little does it proceed from 
the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the first 
place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or productive 
activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are func- 
tions of the human organism, and that each such function, what- 
ever may be its nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of 
human brain, nerves, muscles, &amp;c. Secondly, with regard to that 
which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determination 
of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the quantity 
of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference 
between its quantity and quality. In all states of society, the 
labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, 
must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not 
of equal interest in different stages of development. 1 And lastly, 
from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their 
labour assumes a social form. 

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product 
of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? Clearly 

1 Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what 
could be harvested in a day, and was called Tagwerk, Tagwanne (jurnale, or 
terra jurnalis, or diornalis), Mannsmaad, &amp;c (See G. L. von Maurer, "Ein- 
leitung zur Geschichte der Mark—, &amp;c. Verfassung," Munchen, 1854, 
p. 129 sq.) 



72 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour 
is expressed objectively by their products all being equally val- 
ues; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by the du- 
ration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value 
of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of 
the producers, within which the social character of their labour 
affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the prod- 
ucts. 

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because 
in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an 
objective character stamped upon the product of that labour: 
because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their 
own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing 
not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. 
This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, 
social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and 
imperceptible by the senses. In the same way the light from an 
object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our 
optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the 
eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual 
passage of light from one thing to another, from the external 
object to the eye. There is a physical relation between physical 
things. But it is different with commodities. There, the existence 
of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between 
the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have 
absolutely no connexion with their physical properties and with 
the material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite 
social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the 
fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, 
to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped 
regions of the religious world. In that world the productions of 
the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with 
life, and entering into relation both with one another and the 
human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products 
of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself 
to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commod- 
ities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of 
commodities. 

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing 
analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character 
of the labour that produces them. 

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only 
because they are products of the labour of private individuals 



COMMODITIES 73 



or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently 
of each other. The sum total of the labour of all these private in- 
dividuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the producers' 
do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange 
their products, the specific social character of each producer's 
labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. In other 
words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the 
labour of society, only by means of the relations which the act of 
exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirect- 
ly, through them, between the producers. To the latter, there- 
fore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with 
that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between 
individuals at work, but as what they really are, material rela- 
tions between persons and social relations between things. It is 
only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, 
as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied 
forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a prod- 
uct into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important, 
only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful 
articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and 
their character as values has therefore to be taken into account, 
beforehand, during production. From this moment the labour 
of the individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character. 
On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, 
satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part 
and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social 
division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the 
other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual 
producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability 
of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, 
and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks 
on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the 
most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstrac- 
tion from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common 
denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour-power or human 
labour in the abstract. The two-fold social character of the la- 
bour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, 
only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in 
every-day practice by the exchange of products. In this way, the 
character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful 
takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not 
only useful, but useful for others, and the social character that 
his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular 



74 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

kinds of labour, takes the form that all the physically different 
articles that are the products of labour, have one common quality, 
viz., that of having value. 

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into rela- 
tion with each other as values, it is not because we see in these 
articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. 
Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as 
values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, 
as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon 
them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it. 1 Value, 
therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. 
It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hiero- 
glyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind 
the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of 
utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language. 
The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour, so 
far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human 
labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the 
history of the development of the human race, but, by no means, 
dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour 
appears to us to be an objective character of the products them- 
selves. The fact, that in the particular form of production with 
which we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the spe- 
cific social character of private labour carried on independently, 
consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue 
of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes 
in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the produc- 
ers, notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just 
as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science 
of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained 
unaltered. 

What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they 
make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other 
product they get for their own? in what proportions the products 
are exchangeable? When these proportions have, by custom, at- 
tained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature of 
the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces 
of gold appear as naturally to be of equal value as a pound of 



1 When, therefore, Galiani says: Value is a relation between per- 
sons — "La Ricchezza e una ragione tra due persone," — he ought to have 
added: a relation between persons expressed as a relation between things. 
(Galiani: Delia Moneta, p 221, V III of Custodi's collection of "Scrittori 
Classici Italiani di Economia Politica." Parte Moderna, Milano, 1803.) 



COMMODITIES 75 



gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and 
chemical qualities appear to be of equal weight. The character of 
having value, when once impressed upon products, obtains fixity- 
only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as 
quantities of value. These quantities vary continually, independ- 
ently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. To 
them, their own social action takes the form of tjie action of objects, 
which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them. It re- 
quires a fully developed production of commodities before, from 
accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, 
that all the different kinds of private labour, which are carried 
on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously devel- 
oped branches of the social division of labour, are continually 
being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society 
requires them. And why? Because, in the midst of all the acci- 
dental and ever fluctuating exchange-relations between the prod- 
ucts, the labour-time socially necessary for their production 
forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. The law 
of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears. 1 
The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time is 
therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the 
relative values of commodities. Its discovery, while removing 
all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of 
the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way alters the 
mode in which that determination takes place. 

Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, 
also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly 
opposite to that of their actual historical development. He begins, 
post festum, with the results of the process of development 
ready to hand before him. The characters that stamp products 
as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary pre- 
liminary to the circulation of commodities, have already acquired 
the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, 
before man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for 
in his eyes they are immutable, but their meaning. Consequently 
it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led 
to the determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the 
common expression of all commodities in money that alone led 



1 "What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical 
revolutions? It is just nothing but a law of Nature, founded on the want of 
knowledge of those whose action is the subject of it." (Friedrich Engels: 
"Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," in the "Deutsch-Franzosische 
Jahrbucher," edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. Paris, 1844.) 



76 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

to the establishment of their characters as values. It is, however, 
just this ultimate money-form of the world of commodities that 
actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of 
private labour, and the social relations between the individual 
producers. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation 
to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human 
labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. Nevertheless, 
when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles with 
linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the uni- 
versal equivalent, they express the relation between their own 
private labour and the collective labour of society in the same 
absurd form. 

The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like 
forms. They are forms of thought expressing with social validity 
the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined 
mode of production, viz., the production of commodities. The 
whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy 
that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the 
form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so soon as we come to 
other forms of production. 

Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme 
with political economists, * let us take a look at him on his island. 
Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and 
must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as 
making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. 
Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a 
source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon them as so much 
recreation. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his 
labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the 
same Robinson, and consequently, that it consists of nothing but 
different modes of human labour. Necessity itself compels him 
to apportion his time accurately between his different kinds of 
work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general 
activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less 
as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful effect 



1 Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. "He makes the primitive 
hunter and the primitive fizher straightway, as owners of commodities, ex- 
change fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time is incorporated 
in these exchange-values. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of 
making these men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have 
to be taken into account, the annuity tables in current use on the London 
Exchange in the year 1817. 'The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be 
the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was ac- 
quainted." (Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &amp;c," pp. 38, 39.) 



COMMODITIES 77 



aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, 
and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the 
wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. 
His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong 
to him, of the operations necessary for their production; and last- 
ly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those objects 
have, on an average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson 
and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are 
here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, 
even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. And yet those relations contain all 
that is essential to the determination of value. 

Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed 
in light to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness. Here, 
instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs 
and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Personal 
dependence here characterises the social relations of production 
just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the 
basis of that production. But for the very reason that personal 
dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity 
for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different 
from their reality. They take the shape, in the transactions of 
society, of services in kind and payments in kind. Here the par- 
ticular and natural form of labour, and not, as in a society based 
on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the 
immediate social form of labour. Compulsory labour is just as 
properly measured by time, as commodity-producing labour; 
but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his 
lord, is a definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. 
The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than 
his blessing. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts 
played by the different classes of people themselves in this soci- 
ety, the social relations between individuals in the performance 
of their labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal 
relations, and are not disguised under the shape of social relations 
between the products of labour. 

For an example of labour in common or directly associated 
labour, we have no occasion to go back to that spontaneously 
developed form which we find on the threshold of the history 
of all civilised races. 1 We have one close at hand in the patriae 



1 "A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common prop- 
erty in its primitive form is specifically a Slavonian, or even exclusively 
Russian form It is the primitive form that we can prove to have existed 
amongst Romans, Teutons, and Celts, and even to this day we iind numerous 



78 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

chal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, cattle, 
yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. These different articles 
are, as regards the family, so many products of its labour, but as 
between themselves, they are not commodities. The different kinds 
of labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and 
making clothes, which result in the various products, are in them- 
selves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because func- 
tions of the family, which, just as much as a society based on 
the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously devel- 
oped system of division of labour. The distribution of the work 
within the family, and the regulation of the labour-time of the 
several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex 
as upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour- 
power of each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case 
merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the fam- 
ily, and therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual 
labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a 
social character of their labour. 

Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a commu- 
nity of free individuals, earning on their work with the means 
of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the 
different individuals is consciously applied as the combined la- 
bour-power of the community. All the characteristics of Robin- 
son's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they 
are social, instead of individual. Everything produced by him 
was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore 
simply an object of use for himself. The total product of our 
community is a social product. One portion serves as fresh means 
of production and remains social. But another portion is consumed 
by the members as means of subsistence. A distribution of this 
portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode of this 
distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the 
community, and the degree of historical development attained by 
the producers. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a paral- 
lel with the production of commodities, that the share of each 
individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined 



examples, ruins though they be, in India. A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, 
and especially of Indian forms of common property, would show how from 
the different forms of primitive common property, different forms of its 
dissolution have been developed. Thus, for instance, the various original 
types of Roman and Teutonic private property are deducible from differ- 
ent forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik, &amp;c," 
P- 10.) 



COMMODITIES 79 



by his labour-time. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double 
part. Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan 
maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds of 
work to be done and the various wants of the community. On the 
other hand, it also serves as a measure of the portion of the common 
labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the part of 
the total product destined for individual consumption. The social 
relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their 
labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and 
intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but 
also to distribution. 

The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And 
for a society based upon the production of commodities, in 
which the producers in general enter into social relations with 
one another by treating their products as commodities and values, 
whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the stand- 
ard of homogeneous human labour — for such a society, Chris- 
tianity with its cultus of abstract man, more especially in its 
bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &amp;c, is the most 
fitting form of religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient 
modes of production, we find that the conversion of products 
into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into pro- 
ducers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which, however, 
increases in importance as the primitive communities approach 
nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly 
so called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like 
the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores 
of Polish society. Those ancient social organisms of production 
are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and 
transparent. But they are founded either on the immature devel- 
opment of man individually, who has not yet severed the um- 
bilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive 
tribal community, or upon direct relations of subjection. They can 
arise and exist only when the development of the productive 
power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, 
therefore, the social relations within the sphere of material life, 
between man and man, and between man and Nature, are corre- 
spondingly narrow. This narrowness is reflected in the ancient 
worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular reli- 
gions. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only 
then finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life 
offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable rela- 
tions with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature, 



80 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The life-process of society, which is based on the process of 
material production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it 
is treated as production by freely associated men, and is con- 
sciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. This, 
however, demands for society a certain material ground-work or 
set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the sponta- 
neous product of a long and painful process of development. 

Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incom- 
pletely, 1 value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies 
beneath these forms. But it has never once asked the question 
why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour- 
time by the magnitude of that value. 2 These formulae, which 

1 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, 
and his analysis is by far the best, will appear from the 3rd and 4th books 
of this work. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of the classi- 
cal school of Political Economy that it nowhere, expressly and with full 
consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of 
a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use-value of that prod- 
uct. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats 
labour, at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qual- 
itative aspect. But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between 
various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative 
unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, 
is implied. For instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de 
Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that our physical and moral facul- 
ties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour 
of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employ- 
ment that all those things are created, which we call riches.... It is certain, 
too, that all those things only represent the labour which has created them, 
and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive 
them from that (the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricar- 
do. "The Principles of Pol. Econ.," 3 Ed. Lond. 1821, p. 334.) We would here 
only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound interpretation 
upon the words of Destutt. What the latter really says is, that on the one 
hand all things which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates 
them, but that on the other hand, they acquire their "two different values" 
(use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls 
into the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value 
of one commodity (in this case labour) in order to determine the values of 
the rest. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour (not the value 
of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange-value. Nevertheless, 
Ricardo himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the la- 
bour which has a two-fold embodiment, that he devotes the whole of his 
chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a laborious 
examination of the trivialities of a J. B. Say. And at the finish he is quite 
astonished to find that Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour 
being the source of value, and on the other hand with J. B. Say as to the no- 
tion of value. 

2 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never 
succeeded, by means of its analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of 



COMMODITIES 81 



bear it stamped upon them in unmistakeable letters that they 
belong to a state of society, in which the process of production 
has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, 
such formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a 
self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as productive labour 
itself. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois 
form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the 
Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions. 1 



their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange- 
value. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, 
treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion 
with the inherent nature of commodities. The reason for this is not solely 
because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude 
of value. It lies deeper. The value-form of the product of labour is not only 
the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product 
in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular species 
of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. 
If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature 
for every state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differ- 
entia specifica of the value-form, and consequently of the commodity-form, 
and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &amp;c. We conse- 
quently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time 
being the measure of the magnitude of value, have the most strange and 
contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the general equivalent. 
This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the com- 
monplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. This led to the rise 
of a restored mercantile system (Ganilh, &amp;c), which sees in value nothing 
but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of that form. Once for 
all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that 
economy 'which, since the time of W. Petty, has investigated the real rela- 
tions of production in bourgeois society, in contradistinction to vulgar econ- 
omy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on the 
materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible 
explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but 
for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a pedantic way, and proclaiming 
for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent bourgeoisie 
with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds. 

1 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proc6der. II n'y a pour 
eux que deux sortes d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. Les 
institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions artificielles, celles de la bour- 
geoisie sont des institutions naturelles. lis ressemblent en ceci aux theologiens, 
qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. Toute religion qui n'est pas 
la leur, est une invention des hommes, tandis que leur propre religion est une 
emanation de Dieu — Ainsi il y a eu de l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl 
Marx. Misere de la Philosophie. Reponse a la Philosophic de la Misere par 
M. Proudhon, 1847, p. 113.) Truly comical is M. Bastiat, who imagines that 
the ancient Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. But when people plun- 
der for centuries, there must always be something at hand fof them to seize, 
the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. It would thus appear 
that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, 



82 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism 
inherent in commodities, or by the objective appearance of the 
social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, 
by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature 
in the formation of exchange-value. Since exchange-value is a 
definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour be- 
stowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than 
it has in fixing the course of exchange. 

The mode of production in which the product takes the 
form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the 
most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. 
It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, 
though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner 
as now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy 
to be seen through. But when we come to more concrete forms, 
even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. Whence arose the illu- 
sions of the monetary system? To it gold and silver, when serving 
as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, 
but were natural objects with strange social properties. And modern 
economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary 



an economy, which just as much constituted the material basis of their world, 
as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our modern world. Or perhaps 
Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a 
system of plunder. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. If a giant 
thinker like Aristotle erred in his appreciation of slave labour, why should 
a dwarf economist like Bastiat he right in his appreciation of wage-labour? — 
I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German 
paper in America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekonomie, 1859." In 
the estimation of that paper, my view that each special mode of production 
and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the economic 
structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political 
superstructure is raised, and to which definite social forms of thought cor- 
respond; that the mode of production determines the character of the 
social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our 
own times, in which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle 
ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens and Rome, where politics, reigned 
supreme. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to 
suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the an- 
cient world are unknown to anyone else. This much, however, is clear, 
that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the ancient world 
on politics. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood 
that explains why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief 
part. For the rest, it requires but a slight acquaintance with the history of 
the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is the 
history of its landed property. On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid 
the penalty for wrongly imagining that knight errantry was compatible 
with all economic forms of society. 



COMMODITIES 83 



system, does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-day, 
whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy dis- 
carded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil 
and not out of society? 

But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet 
another example relating to the commodity-form. Gould com- 
modities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may 
be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What, 
however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our natural 
intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other 
we are nothing but exchange-values. Now listen how those com- 
modities speak through the mouth of the economist. "Value"— (i.e., 
exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches"— (i.e., 
use-value) "of man. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies 
exchanges, riches do not." * "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute 
of men, value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a commu- 
nity is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... A pearl or a dia- 
mond is valuable" as a pearl or diamond. 2 So far no chemist 
has ever discovered exchange-value either in a pearl or a diamond. 
The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the- 
by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the 
use-value of objects belongs to them independently of their mate- 
rial properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a 
part of them as objects. What confirms them in this view, is the 
peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is realised 
without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the 
objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is real- 
ised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. 
W T ho fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who 
informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man 
is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." 3 



1 "Observations on certain verbal disputes in Pol. Econ., particularly 
relating to value and to demand and supply." Lond., 1821, p. 16. 

2 S. Bailey, 1. c, p. 165. 

3 Tbe author of "Observations" and S. Bailey accuse Ricardo of con- 
verting exchange-value from something relative into something absolute. The 
opposite is the fact. He has explained the apparent relation between objects, 
such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-val- 
ues, and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, 
their relation to each other as mere expressions of human labour. If the fol- 
lowers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by no means convinc- 
ingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in 
Ricardo's own works any key to the hidden relations existing between value 
and its form, exchange-value. 



84 



CHAPTER II 
EXCHANGE 

It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make 
exchanges of their own account. We must, therefore, have recourse 
to their guardians, who are also their owners. Commodities are 
things, and therefore without power of resistance against man. 
If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in other 
words, he can take possession of them. 1 In order that these objects 
may enter into relation with each other as commodities, their 
guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as 
persons whose will resides in those objects, and must behave in 
such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of the 
other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by 
mutual consent. They must, therefore, mutually recognise in each 
other the rights of private proprietors. This juridical relation, 
which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract 
be part of a developed legal system or not, is a relation between 
two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation 
between the two. It is this economic relation that determines 
the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. 2 The 



1 In the 12th century, so renowned tor its piety, they included amongst 
commodities some very delicate things. Thos a French poet of the period 
enumerates amongst the goods to be found in the market of Landit, not only 
clothing, shoes, leather, agricultural implements, &amp;c, but also "femmes 
lolles de leur corps." 

2 Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of "justice eternelle," 
from the juridical relations that correspond to the production of commodi- 
ties: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of all good citi- 
zens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting 
as justice. Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of 
commodities, and the actual legal system corresponding thereto, in accordance 
with this ideal. What opinion should we have of a chemist, who, instead 
of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes inthe composition and 
decomposition of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, 



EXCHANGE 85 



persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, 
therefore, as owners of, commodities. In the course of our investi- 
gation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear 
on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic 
relations that exist between them. 

What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the 
fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form 
of appearance of its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, it is 
always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and 
every other commodity, be the same more repulsive than Maritor- 
nes herself. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity 
of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and more senses. His 
commodity possesses for himself no immediate use-value. Other- 
wise, he would not bring it to the market. It has use-value for 
others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that of being a 
depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of 
exchange. 1 Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for com- 
modities whose value in use is of service to him. All commodities 
are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their non- 
owners. Consequently, they must all change hands. But this change 
of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts 
them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as 
values. Hence commodities must be realised as values before they 
can be realised as use-values. 

On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values 
before they can be realised as values. For the labour spent upon 
them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that 
is useful for others. Whether that labour is useful for others, 
and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of 
others, can be proved only by the act of exchange. 

Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange 
only for those commodities whose use-value satisfies some want 



claimed to regulate the composition and decomposition ol matter by means of 
the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "aft'inite"? Do we really know any 
more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," "equite 
eternelle," "mutuality eternelle," and other "verites eternelles" than the fa- 
thers of the church did when they said it was incompatible with "grace eter- 
nelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"? 

1 "For two-fold is the use of every object.... The one is peculiar to the 
object as such, the other is not, as a sandal which may be worn, and is also 
exchangeable. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who exchanges the 
sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as 
a sandal. But not in its natural way. For it has not been made for the sake 
of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep.," 1. i. c. 9.) 



86 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of his. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private 
transaction. On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of 
his commodity, to convert it into any other suitable commodity 
of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has 
or has not any use-value for the owner of the other. From this 
point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of a 
general character. But one and the same set of transactions cannot 
be simultaneously for all owners of commodities both exclu- 
sively private and exclusively social and general. 

Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner of a 
commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a 
particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is 
the universal equivalent for all the others. But since this applies 
to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting as uni- 
versal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses 
no general form under which they can be equated as values and 
have the magnitude of their values compared. So far, therefore, 
they do not confront each other as commodities, but only as 
products or use-values. In their difficulties our commodity- 
owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They 
therefore acted and transacted before they thought. Instinctively 
they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. 
They cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, 
and therefore as commodities, except by comparing them with 
some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. That 
we saw from the analysis of a commodity. But a particular com- 
modity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a social 
act. The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets 
apart the particular commodity in which they all represent their 
values. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the 
form of the socially recognised universal equivalent. To be the 
universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific 
function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it 
becomes — money. "Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem 
et potestatem suam bestise tradunt. Et ne quis possit emere aut 
vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestise, ^ut nume- 
rum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.) 

Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the 
exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically 
equated to one another and thus by practice converted into com- 
modities. The historical progress and extension of exchanges de- 
velops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and 
value. The necessity for giving an external expression to this 



EXCHANGE §7 



contrast for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on 
the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no 
rest until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of com- 
modities into commodities and money. At the same rate, then, 
as the conversion of products into commodities is being accom- 
plished, so also is the conversion of one special commodity into 
money. 1 

The direct barter of products attains the elementary form 
of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in an- 
other. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. The form 
of direct barter is x use-value A= y use-value B. 2 The articles 
A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become so 
only by the act of barter. The first step made by an object of util- 
ity towards acquiring exchange-value is when it forms a non-use- 
value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous 
portion of some article required for his immediate wants. Objects 
in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable 
by him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is 
only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each 
other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by impli- 
cation as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal 
independence has no existence in a primitive society based on 
property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a 
patriarchal family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian 
Inca State. The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins 
on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact 
with other similar communities, or with members of the latter. 
So soon, however, as products once become commodities in the 
external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become 
so in its internal intercourse. The proportions in which they are 
exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What makes 
them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alie- 
nate them. Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility 



1 From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit- 
bourgeois socialism, which, while perpetuating the production of commodi- 
ties, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and commodities, 
and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at 
abolishing money itself. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism with- 
out the Pope. For more on this point see my work "Zur Kritik der Pol. 
Oekon." ,p. 61, sq. 

2 So long as, instead of two distinct use-values being exchanged, a 
chaotic mass of articles are offered as the equivalent of a single article, which 
is often the case with savages, even the direct barter of products is in its 
first infancy. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



gradually establishes itself. The constant repetition of exchange 
makes it a normal social act. In the course of time, therefore, some 
portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with 
a special view to exchange. From that moment the distinction 
becomes firmly established between the utility of an object for 
the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of ex- 
change. Its use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange- 
value. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in which 
the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their produc- 
tion itself. Custom stamps them as values with definite magni- 
tudes. 

In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly 
a means of exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an 
equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. 
At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire 
a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the individ- 
ual needs of the exchangers. The necessity for a value-form grows 
with the increasing number and variety of the commodities ex- 
changed. The problem and the means of solution arise simultane- 
ously. Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to 
those of others, and exchange them on a large scale, without differ- 
ent kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being ex- 
changeable for, and equated as values to, one and the same special 
article. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the equivalent 
of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within 
narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent. This 
character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that 
called it into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first 
to this and then to that commodity. But with the development of 
exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts 
of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money- 
form. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at 
first a matter of accident. Nevertheless there are two circumstances 
whose influence is decisive. The money-form attaches itself either 
to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these 
in fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange- 
value of home products finds expression; or else it attaches itself 
to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion 
of indigenous alienable wealth. Nomad races are the first to 
develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods consist 
of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and be- 
cause their mode of life, by continually bringing them into con- 
tact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. 



EXCHANGE gg 



Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve 
as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for 
that purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois 
society already well developed. It dates from the last third of 
the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice 
on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the 
French bourgeois revolution. 

In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the 
value of commodities more and more expands into an embodi- 
ment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion 
the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are 
by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal equiv- 
alent. Those commodities are the precious metals. 

The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver 
are not by Nature money, money is by Nature gold and silver," 1 
is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals 
for the functions of money. 2 Up to this point, however, we are 
acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to serva 
as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as 
the material in which the magnitudes of their values are socially 
expressed. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit 
embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal 
human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample 
exhibits the same uniform qualities. On the other hand, since the 
difference between the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, 
the money-commodity must be susceptible of merely quantita^ 
tive differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally 
capable of being re-united. Gold and silver possess these properties 
by Nature. 

The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. 
In addition to its special use-value as a commodity (gold, 
for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of 
articles of luxury, &amp;c), it acquires a formal use-value, originat- 
ing in its specific social function. 

Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of 
money, the latter being their universal equivalent, they, with 
regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts 
of particular commodities. 3 



1 Karl Marx. 1. c, p. 135. "I metalli ... naturalmente moneta." 
(Galiani, "Delia moneta" in Custodi's Collection: Parte Moderna t. iii.). 

2 For further details on this subject see in my work cited above, the 
chapter on "The precious metals." 

3 "II danaro e la merce universale" (Verri, 1. c, p. 16). 



90 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown 
upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all 
the rest. That money is a commodity 1 is therefore a new discovery 
only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully de- 
veloped shape. The act of exchange gives to the commodity con- 
verted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. 
By confounding these two distinct things some writers have 
been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary. 2 
The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere 
symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, that 
it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error lurked 
a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an insep- 
arable part of that object, but is simply the form under which 
certain social relations manifest themselves. In this sense every 
commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only 
the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it. 3 But if 



1 "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general 
name of bullion) are ... commodities ... rising and falling in ... value... 
Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller 
weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of 
the countrey," &amp;c. ("A Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, 
and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to other." By a Merchant! 
Lond., 1695, p. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are 
used for a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, 
oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A Discourse concerning Trade, and that in 
particular of the East Indies," &amp;c. London, 1689, p. 2.) "The stock and riches 
of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and 
silver to be excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a 
Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p. 4.) 

2 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser mo- 
neta." (Galiani, 1. c.) Locke says, "The universal consent of mankind erave 
to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for money, an 
imaginary value." Law, on the other hand, "How could different nations 
give an imaginary value to any single thing... or how could this imaginary 
value have' maintained itself?" But the following shows how little he 
himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion 
to the value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. 
By its adoption as money it received an additional value (une valeur addi- 
tionnelle)". (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et le commerce" 
in E. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII. siecle ," p. 470.) 

3 "L'Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. de Forbonnais: "Elements 
du Commerce, Nouv. Edit. Leyde, 1766," t. II., p. 143.) "Comme signe il 
est attire par les denrees." (1. c, p. 155.) "L'argent est un signe d'une 
chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (CEuvres, Lond. 
1767, t. II, p. 2.) "L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car*il est lui-meme rich- 
esse; il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les equivaut." (Le Trosne, I. c, p. 
910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere sym- 



EXCHANGE 91 



it be declared that the social characters assumed by objects, or 
the material forms assumed by the social qualities of labour under 
the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, 
it is in the same breath also declared that these characteristics 
are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent 
of mankind. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during 
the 18th century. Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling 
forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people 
sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing 
to them a conventional origin. 

It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form 
of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magni- 
tude of its value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold 
is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other 
commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., 
for instance, of gold is worth. Money, like every other commodity, 
cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in 
other commodities. This value is determined by the labour-time 
required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity 
of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour- 
time. 1 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes 



bol; the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 
1. c, p. 100.) Lawyers started long before economists the idea that money 
is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious metals is purely imagi- 
nary. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, support- 
ing the right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the mid- 
dle ages, by the traditions of the Roman Empire and the conceptions of money 
to be found in the Pandects "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive faire doute," says an 
apt scholar of theirs, Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a 
notre majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... le mestier, le fait, 
l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des monnaies, de donner tel cours, 
et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim of 
the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. 
It was expressly forbidden to treat money as a commodity. "Pecunias vero 
nulli einere fas erit, nam in usu publico constitutas oportet non esse mercem." 
Some good work on this question has been done by G. F. Pagnini: "Saggio 
sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. II. In 
the second part of his work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against 
the lawyers. 

1 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth 
in Peru, in the same time that he can produce a bushelof Corn, then the one 
is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or more easie 
mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, 
the corn will be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five 
shillings, ceteris paribus." William Petty. "A Treatise of Taxes and Contri- 
butions." Lond., 1667, p. 32. 



92 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

place at the source of its production by means of barter. When 
it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given. 
In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown 
that money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy 
of the analysis. The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that 
money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what 
means a commodity becomes money. 1 

We have already seen, from the most elementary expression 
of value, x commodity A=y commodity B, that the object in 
which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, 
appears to have the equivalent form independently of this rela- 
tion, as a social property given to it by Nature. We followed up 
this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete 
so soon as the universal equivalent form becomes identified with 
the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystal- 
lised into the money-form. What appears to happen is, not that 
gold becomes money, in consequence of all other commodities 
expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other 
commodities universally express their values in gold, because it 
is money. The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the 
result and leave no trace behind. Commodities find their own value 
already completely represented, without any initiative on their 
part, in another commodity existing in company with them. These 
objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of 
the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human 
labour. Hence the magic of money. In the form of society now under 
consideration, the behaviour of men in the social process of 
production is purely atomic. Hence their relations to each other 



1 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false 
definitions of money may be divided into two main groups: those which make 
it more, and those which make it less, than a commodity," gives us a long 
and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it 
appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; 
and then he moralises thus: "For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of 
the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the peculiarities that 
distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either 
more or less than a commodity!)... "So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction 
of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation." (Wilhelm Roscher: "Die 
Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn., 1858, pp. 207-210.) More! 
less! not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of 
ideas and language! And such eclectic professorial twaddle i is modestly 
baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method!' of Political 
Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, Aamely, that 
money is "a pleasant commodity." 



EXCHANGE 93 



in production assume a material character independent of their 
control and conscious individual action. These facts manifest 
themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form 
of commodities. We have seen how the progressive development 
of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged com- 
modity with the character of money. Hence the riddle presented 
by money is but the riddle presented by commodities; only it 
now strikes us in its most glaring form. 



94 



CHAPTER III 
MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 

SECTION 1.— THE MEASURE OF VALUES 

Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, 
gold as the money-commodity. 

The first chief function of money is to supply commodities 
with the material for the expression of their values, or to 
represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, 
qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable. It thus 
serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of this 
function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, 
become money. 

It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. 
Just the contrary. It is because all commodities, as values, are 
realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their 
values can be measured by one and the same special commodity, 
and the latter be converted into the common measure of their 
values, i.e., into money. Money as a measure of value JL J_s the 
phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that 
measure of value which is immanent in commodities, laboUr-fcrmeT^ 

1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, 
so that a piece of paper may represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at 
bottom the same as the question why, given the production of commodities, 
must products take the form of commodities? This is evident, since their 
taking the form of commodities implies their differentiation into commodi- 
ties and money. Or, why cannot private labour — labour for the account of 
private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? 
I have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" 
in a society founded on the production of commodities (1. c, p. 61, seq.). 
On this point I will only say further, that Owen's "labour-money," for in- 
stance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. Owen pre-supposes 
directly associated labour, a form of production that -is entirely inconsist- 
ent with the production of commodities. The certificate of labour is merely 
evidence of the part taken by the individual in the common labour, and of 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 95 

The expression of the value of a commodity in gold— x 
commodity A=y money-commodity — is its money-form or 
price. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron =2 ounces of gold, 
now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially valid 
manner. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure 
as a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all 
other commodities, because the equivalent commodity, gold, 
now has the character of money. The general form of relative 
value has resumed its original shape of simple or isolated relative 
value. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative 
value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form 
peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity. The series 
itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices 
of actual commodities. We have only to read the quotations of 
a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of 
money expressed in all sorts of commodities. But money itself has 
no price. In order to put it on an equal footing with all other 
commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to 
itself as its own equivalent. 

The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form 
of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily 
form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. Although 
invisible, the value of iron, linen and corn has actual existence 
in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their 
equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their 
own heads. Their owner must, therefore, lend them his tongue, 
or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communi- 
cated to the outside world. 1 Since the expression of the value of 
commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for this 
purpose imaginary or ideal money. Every trader knows, that he 



his right to a certain portion of the common produce destined for consumption. 
But it never enters into Owen's head to pre-suppose the production of com- 
modities, and at the same time, by juggling with money, to try to evade the 
necessary conditions of that production. 

1 Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. Captain 
Parry says of the inhabitants on the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this 
case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to them) twice 
to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfac- 
torily concluded." In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles 
they received in exchange. If the tongue is thus used in the North as the 
organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves 
as the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth 
of a man by the size of his belly. That the Kaffirs know what they are about 
is shown by the following: at the same time that the official British Health 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



is far from having turned his goods into money, when he has ex- 
pressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it 
does not require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that 
metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. When, therefore, money 
serves as a measure of value, it is employed only as imaginary 
or ideal money. This circumstance has given rise to the wildest 
theories. 1 But, although the money that performs the functions 
of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely 
upon the actual substance that is money. The value, or in other 
words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, 
is expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money- 
commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron. 
According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or 
copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very 
different prices, or will be represented by very different quantities 
of those metals respectively. 

If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and 
silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities 
have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. 
These exist quietly side by side, so long as the ratio of the value 
of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15 : 1. Every 
change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the 
gold-prices and the silver-prices of commodities, and thus proves, 
by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the 
functions of a standard. 2 



Report of 1864 disclosed the deficiency of fat-forming food among a large 
part of the working-class, a certain Dr. Harvey (not, however, the celebrat- 
ed discoverer of the circulation of the blood), made a good thing by adver- 
tising recipes for reducing the superfluous fat of the bourgeoisie and aris- 
tocracy. 

1 See Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &amp;c." "Theorien von der Masseinheit des 
Geldes," p. 53, seq. 

2 "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the 
function of money or of a measure of value side by side, it has always been 
tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. To assume 
that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in 
which a given quantity of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact, 
that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given mass 
of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of 
gold. From the reign of Edward III. to the time of George II., the history 
of money in England consists of one long series of perturbations caused by 
the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between the values of gold and silver, 
with the fluctuations in their real values. At one time gold was too high, 
at another, silver. The metal that for the time being was estimated below 
its value, was withdrawn from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio 
between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 97 

Commodities with definite prices present themselves under 
the form: a commodity A=x gold; b commodity B =z gold; 
c commodity C=y gold, &amp;c, where a, b, c, represent definite 
quantities of the commodities A, B, G and x, z, y, definite quan- 
tities of gold. The values of these commodities are, therefore, 
changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. 
Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of the commodities them- 
selves, their values become magnitudes of the same denomination, 
gold-magnitudes. They are now capable of being compared with 
each other and measured, and the want becomes technically felt 
of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit 
measure. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, 
becomes itself the standard or scale. Before they become money, 
gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures 
in their standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, 
while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into ounces, 
and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. x 
It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names 
given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken 
from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight. 

As measure of value, and as standard of price, money has two 
entirely distinct functions to perform. It is the measure of value 
inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human 



ratio soon came into conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the 
slight and transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which 
was a consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far 
more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its 
expulsion from circulation by gold. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the 
excess in France of gold-imports over gold-exports amounted to £ 41 ,580,000, 
while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was £ 14,704,000. In 
fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, 
and therefore both legal tender, so that everyone has the option of paying 
in either metal, the metal that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every 
other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone 
serves in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience and 
history with regard to this question is simply that, where two commodities 
perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in practice one alone 
maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 52, 53.) 

1 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in 
England as the unit of the standard of money, the pound sterling does not 
form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our coinage was 
originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce oi sil- 
ver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces oi coin; 
but as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage adapted only to 
silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces 
Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1856, p. lb. 



98 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

labour- it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight 
of metal. As the measure of value it serves to convert the values 
of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quan- 
tities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quanti- 
ties of gold. The measure of values measures commodities consid- 
ered as values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, 
quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not the value of 
one quantity of gold by the weight of another. In order to make 
gold a standard of price, a certain weight must be fixed upon as the 
unit. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the 
same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of 
measure is all-important. Hence, the less the unit is subject to 
variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its 
office. But only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, 
therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure 
of value. 1 

It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value 
of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of 
price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between 
the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant. 
However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold still have 
12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing consid- 
ered is the relation between different quantities of gold. Since, on 
the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can 
alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its 
aliquot parts. Thus gold always renders the same service as an 
invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary. 

In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not 
interfere with its functions as a measure of value. The change 
affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris 
paribus, leaves their relative values inter se, unaltered, although 
those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold-prices. 

Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by 
a definite quantity of the use-value of some other commodity, 
so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume noth- 
ing more than that the production of a given quantity of gold 
costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. As regards 
the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws 
of elementary relative value investigated in a former chapter. 



1 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and 
standard of price (standard of value) is indescribable. Their functions, as 
well as their names, are constantly interchanged. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULAT ION OP COMMODITIES 99 

A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, 
either from a rise in their values— the value of money remaining 
constant— or from a fall in the value of money, the values 
of commodities remaining constant. On the other hand, a general 
fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the values of 
commodities— the value of money remaining constant— or 
from a rise in the value of money, the values of commodities re- 
maining constant. It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in 
the value of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the 
prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of money implies 
a proportional rise in prices. Such change of price holds good only 
in the case of commodities whose value remains constant. With 
those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and 
proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. 
And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of money, 
the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the differ- 
ence between the change in their value and that of money; and 
so on. 

Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form. 

By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current 
money-names of the various weights of the precious metal 
figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names 
originally represented. This discrepancy is the result of his- 
torical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation 
of foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. 
This happened in Rome in its early days, where gold and silver 
coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. The names of 
these foreign coins never coincide with those of the indigenous 
weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is thrust 
out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, 
copper by silver, silver by gold, however much this order of se- 
quence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. 1 The 
word pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual 
pound weight of silver. When gold replaced silver as a measure 
of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio be- 
tween the values of silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound 
of gold. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes differen- 
tiated from the same word as a weight-name. 2 (3) The debasing 



1 Moreover, it has not general historical validity. 

2 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one- 
third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the union, only l-36th; 
the French livre, l-74th; the Spanish maravedi, less than 1-1, 000th; and the 
Portuguese rei a still smaller fraction. 



100 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of money carried on for centuries by kings and princes to such 
an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in 
fact remained but the names. 1 

These historical causes convert the separation of the money- 
name from the weight-name into an established habit with the 
community. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely 
conventional, and must on the other hand find general accept- 
ance, it is in the end regulated by law. A given weight of one of the 
precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially 
divided into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such 
as pound, dollar, &amp;c. These aliquot parts, which thenceforth 
serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot 
parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &amp;c. 2 But, both 
before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of 
metal is the standard of metallic money. The sole alteration con- 
sists in the subdivision and denomination. 

The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of 
commodities are ideally changed, are therefore now expressed 
in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the sub- 
divisions of the gold standard. Hence, instead of saying: A quarter 
of wheat is worth an ounce of gold; we say, it is worth £3 17s. 

10 y d. In this way commodities express by their prices how much 

they are worth, and money serves as money of account whenever 
it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form, 3 
The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities 
of that thing. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his 
name is Jacob. In the same way with regard to money, every 
trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, 
franc, ducat, &amp;c. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden 
meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these 
money-names express both the values of commodities, and, at 
the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is 

1 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideali sono le piu antiche d'ogni na- 
zione, e tutte furono un tempo reali, e perche erano reali con esse si con 
tava." (Galiani: Delia moneta, 1. c, p. 153.) 

2 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstros- 
ity (!) that now-a-days a pound (sterling), which is the unit of the English 
standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of gold. "This is 
falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false de- 
nomination" of the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand 
of civilisation. 

3 When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used mon- 
ey, he replied, "For reckoning." (Athen. Deipn. 1. iv. 49 v. 2. ed. Schweig- 
hauser, 1802.) 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 101 

the standard of money. 1 On the other hand, it is absolutely neces- 
sary that value, in order that it may be distinguished from the 
varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this material 
and unmeaning, but, at the same time, purely social form. 2 

Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. 
Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with 
the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, 8 just 
as in general the expression of the relative value of a commodity 
is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities. But although 
price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's 
value, is the exponent of its exchange-ratio with money, it does 
not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily 
the exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. Sup- 
pose two equal quantities of socially necessary labour to be respec- 
tively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly */ 2 oz. 
of gold), £2 is the expression in money of the magnitude of the 
value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. If now circumstances 
allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced 
to £1, then although £1 and £3 may be too small or too great 
properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value, neverthe- 



1 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard oi price, 
appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, 
and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. 10 -^ d. may signify on the one hand 
an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this 
reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. Hence there sprang 
up the extraordinary notion, that the value of gold is estimated in its own 
material, and that, in contradistinction to all other commodities, its price 
is fixed by the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning 
names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of 
those weights." (Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 52.) 

2 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kntik der 
Pol. Oekon. &amp;c," p. 53, seq. The fantastic notions about raising or lowering 
the mint -price of money by transferring to greater or smaller weights of 
gold or silver the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of 
those metals; such notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not 
at clumsy financial operations against creditors, both public and private, 
but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. 
Petty in his "Quantulumcunaue concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of 
Halifax, 1682," that even his immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and 
John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him. "If the wealth 
of a nation," he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were 
strange that such proclamations have not long since been made by our 
Governors." (1. c, p. 36.) 

3 "Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d un million en ar- 
gent vaut plus qu'une valeur egale en marchandises." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 
919), which amounts to saying "qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une valeur egale. 



102 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

less they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form 
under which its value appears, i.e., money; and in the second 
place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If the 
conditions of production, in other words, if the productive power 
of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time 
must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the 
reproduction of a quarter of wheat. This circumstance depends, 
neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners 
of other commodities. 

Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, 
it expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a cer- 
tain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society 
required to produce it. As soon as magnitude of value is converted 
into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more 
or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity 
and another, the money-commodity. But this exchange-ratio may 
express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, 
or the quantity of gold deviating from that value, for which, 
according to circumstances, it may be parted with. The possibility, 
therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magni- 
tude of value, or the deviation of the former from the latter, is 
inherent in the price-form itself. This is no defect, but, on the 
contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production 
whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of appar- 
ently lawless irregularities that compensate one another. 

The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the 
possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude 
of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression 
in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so 
much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form of 
commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Objects 
that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, 
&amp;c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and 
of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. 
Hence an object may have a price without having value. The 
price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathe- 
matics. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may some- 
times conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for in- 
stance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, 
because no human labour has been incorporated in it. 

Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of 
a commodity {e.g., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quan- 
tity of the equivalent {e.g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchange^ 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 103 

able for iron. But it by no means states the converse, that 
iron is directly exchangeable for gold. In order, therefore, that 
a commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, 
it must quit its bodily shape, must transform itself from mere 
imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such tran- 
substantiation may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "con- 
cept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to a lobster 
the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the 
old Adam. l Though a commodity may, side by side with its actual 
form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of 
gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both 
iron and gold. To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in 
imagination. But to enable it to render to its owner the service 
of a universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. 
If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some other 
commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price 
of the iron as proof that it was already money, he would get the 
same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter 
recited the creed — 

"Assai bene e trascorsa 
D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso, 
Ma dimmi se tu l'hai nella tua borsa." 

A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchange- 
able for money, and also that it must be so exchanged. On the 
other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because 
it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as 
the money-commodity. Under the ideal measure of values there 
lurks the hard cash. 

SECTION 2.— -THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION 
a. The Metamorphosis of Commodities 

We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodi- 
ties implies contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions. 
The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money 
does not sweep away these inconsistencies, but develops a mo- 
dus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side. This is 



1 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the hodily 
flesh, as is shown by his fight in the desert with the handsome women of his 
imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. "I thought," he 
says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" 
asked a voice. "I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great 
Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian." 



104 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled. 
For instance, it is a contradiction to depict one body as constantly 
falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly 
flying away from it. The ellipse is a form of motion which, while 
allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same time reconciles it. 

In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are 
transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to 
hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation 
of matter. The product of one form of useful labour replaces that 
of another. When once a commodity has found a resting-place, 
where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of ex- 
change into that of consumption. But the former sphere alone in- 
terests us at present. We have, therefore, now to consider exchange 
from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or 
metamorphosis of commodities which effectuates the social cir- 
culation of matter. 

The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very 
imperfect. The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indis- 
tinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a com- 
modity results from the exchange of two commodities, an ordinary 
one and the money-commodity. If we keep in view the material 
fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we 
overlook the very thing that we ought to observe — namely, 
what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook 
the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and 
that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this 
gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves. 

Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange 
just as they are. The process then differentiates them into commodi- 
ties and money, and thus produces an external opposition corre- 
sponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being 
at once use-values and values. Commodities as use-values now 
stand opposed to money as exchange-value. On the other hand, 
both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use-value and 
value. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite 
poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Being poles they are 
as necessarily opposite as they are connected. On the one side of 
the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality 
a use-value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by 
which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real em- 
bodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic 
reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as 
gold, is exchange-value itself. As to its use-value, that has only 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 105 

an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of 
relative value in which it stands face to face with all other com- 
modities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various 
uses of gold. These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real 
forms in which the process of their exchange moves and takes place. 

Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, 
our old friend the weaver of linen— to the scene of action, the 
market. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. He ex- 
changes it for the £2, and then, like a man of the good old stamp 
that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same 
price. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depos- 
itory of value, he alienates in exchange for gold, which is the 
linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another 
commodity, the Bible, which is destined to enter his house as 
an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. The exchange 
becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite 
yet supplementary character — the conversion of the commodity 
into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity. l 
The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct 
transactions of the weaver — selling, or the exchange of the com- 
modity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a 
commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy. 

The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, 
is this, that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now 
has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses 
another of the same value but of different utility. In like manner 
he procures his other means of subsistence and means of production. 
From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing 
more than the exchange of the product of his labour for the 
product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of 
products. 

The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by 
the following changes in their form. 

Commodity— Money— Commodity. 
C M C. 

The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the 
objects themselves, C— C, the exchange of one commodity for 



1 "£•/ 6s too .... noob&lt;i ctvTa|i6et(S ea&amp;ou 7idvTa, cprpiv o'Hpax/.eitoi;, xai nop dnavrwv, 
uio7iep ipuaoo ip-i]\ia-:a xal xp^jJtitcov ypoao?'. (F. Lassalle: "Die Philosophie 
Herakleitos des Dunkeln." Berlin, 1858, Vol. l.p. 222.) Lassalle in his note 
on this passage, p. 224, n. 3, erroneously makes gold a mere symbol of value. 



106 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

another, the circulation of materialised social labour. When 
this result is attained, the process is at an end. 



C — M. First metamorphosis, or sale 

The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, 
into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the 
salto mortale of the commodity. If it falls short, then, although 
the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. 
The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided 
as his wants are many-sided. This is precisely the reason why the 
product of his labour serves him solely as exchange-value. But it 
cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal 
equivalent, except by being converted into money. That money, 
however, is in some one else's pocket. In order to entice the money 
out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, 
be a use-value to the owner of the money. For this, it is necessary 
that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is socially use- 
ful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of 
labour. But division of labour is a system of production which 
has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the 
backs of the producers. The commodity to be exchanged may 
possibly be the product of some new kind of labour, that pretends 
to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself 
to new requirements. A particular operation, though yesterday, 
perhaps, forming one out of the many operations conducted by 
one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate 
itself from this connexion, may establish itself as an independ- 
ent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to market 
as an independent commodity. The circumstances may or may 
not be ripe for such a separation. To-day the product satisfies a 
social want. To-morrow the article may, either altogether or par- 
tially, be superseded by some other appropriate product. Moreover, 
although our weaver's labour may be a recognised branch of the 
social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to 
guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's 
want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other want, 
should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our 
friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently 
useless. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, 
our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making 
presents. But suppose his product turn out a real use-value, 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 107 

and thereby attracts money? The question arises, how much 
will it attract? No doubt the answer is already anticipated in 
the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its 
value. We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscal- 
culation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon rectified 
in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his product only 
that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially necessa- 
ry. The price then, is merely the money-name of the quantity of 
social labour realised in his commodity. But without the leave, 
and behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of 
weaving undergoes a change. The labour-time that yesterday 
was without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard 
of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which the owner of the money 
is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's 
competitors. Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far be- 
tween. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the market 
contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. In spite 
of this, all these pieces taken as a whole, may have had super- 
fluous labour-time spent upon them. If the market cannot stomach 
the whole quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this 
proves that too great a portion of the total labour of the community 
has been expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same 
as if each individual weaver had expended more labour-time 
upon his particular product than is socially necessary. Here we 
may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. 
All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, 
of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter of 
fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised 
form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homoge- 
neous human labour.* 

We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the 
course of true love never did run smooth." The quantitative 
division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spon- 
taneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. The 
owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division 
of labour that turns them into independent private producers, 

* Tn his letter of November 28, 1878, to N. F. Danielson (Nikolai— on) 
Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as follows: "And, as 
a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form 
of a part of the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An 
analogous correction was made in a copy of the second German edition of 
the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his hand- 
writing. — Note by the Institute of Marxism- Leninism in the Russian 
edition. 



108 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

also frees the social process of production and the relations of the 
individual producers to each other within that process, from all 
dependence on the will of those producers, and that the seeming 
mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a 
system of general and mutual dependence through or by means 
of the products. 

The division of labour converts the product of labour into a 
commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion 
into money. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment 
of this transubstantiation quite accidental. Here, however, 
we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its integrity, and 
we therefore assume its progress to be normal. Moreover, if the 
conversion take place at all, that is, if the commodity be not 
absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although 
the price realised may be abnormally above or below the value. 

The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer 
has his gold replaced by a commodity. The fact which here stares 
us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and 
£2, have changed hands and places, in other words, that they 
have been exchanged. But for what is the commodity exchanged? 
For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equiva- 
lent. And for what is the gold exchanged? For a particular form of 
its own use-value. Why does gold take the form of money face 
to face with the linen? Because the linen's price of £2, its de- 
nomination in money, has already equated the linen to gold in its 
character of money. A commodity strips off its original commodity- 
form on being alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually 
attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its price. 
The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, 
is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal use-value 
of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the simul- 
taneous conversion of money into a commodity. The apparently 
single process is in reality a double one. From the pole of the com- 
modity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money- 
owner, it is a purchase. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M 
is also M— C. 1 

Up to this point we have considered men in only one econom- 
ic capacity, that of owners of commodities, a capacity in 
which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by 



1 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce 
et les Travaux des Artisans." Physiocrates ed. Daire I. Partie, Paris, 1846, 
p. 170), or as Quesnay in his "Maximes generates" puts it, "Vendre est acheter." 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 109 

alienating that of their own labour. Hence, for one commodity- 
owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either, 
that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, 
should be in itself money, should be gold, the material of which 
money consists, or that his product should already have changed 
its skin and have stripped off its original form of a useful object. 
In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of cours3 
enter the market at some point or other. This point is to be found 
at the source of production of the metal, at which place gold is 
bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other 
product of equal value. From that moment it always represents 
the realised price of some commodity. 1 Apart from its exchange 
for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in 
whose-so-ever hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some 
commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or 
of the first metamorphosis G — M. 2 Gold, as we saw, became ideal 
money, or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities 
measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with 
their natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape 
of their value. It became real money, by the general alienation 
of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural 
forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the embodi- 
ment of their values. When they assume this money-shape, com- 
modities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of 
the particular kind of labour to which they owe their creation, 
in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recog- 
nised incarnation of homogeneous human labour. We cannot tell 
from the mere look of a piece of money, for what particular com- 
modity it has been exchanged. Under their money-form all com- 
modities look alike. Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is 
not money. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in considera- 
tion of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the meta- 
morphosed shape of a quarter of wheat. The sale of the linen, 
G— M, is at the same time its purchase, M— G. But the sale is 
the first act of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite 
nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the purchase of the linen, 
on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transac- 
tion of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. 



1 "Le prix d'une marchandise ne pouvant etre paye que par le prix 
d'une autre marchandise." (Mercier de la Riviere: "L'Ordre naturel et esseu- 
tiel de societes politiques." Physiocrates, ed Daire II. Partie, p. 554.) 

2 "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. c, p. 543. 



HO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

G — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of G — M — C (linen — 
money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase 
of another movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). The first 
metamorphosis of one commodity, its transformation from a com- 
modity into money, is therefore also invariably the second meta- 
morphosis of some other commodity, the retransformation of the 
latter from money into a commodity. * 

M — C, or purchase. The second 
and concluding metamorphosis of a commodity 

Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other com- 
modities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason 
it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. It reads all 
prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies 
of all other commodities, which offer to it the material for the 
realisation of its own use-value. At the same time the prices, 
wooing glances cast at money by commodities, define the limits 
of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. Since every 
commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodi- 
ty, it is impossible to tell from the money itself, how it got 
into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed 
into it. Non olet, from whatever source it may come. Represent- 
ing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other 
a commodity to be bought. 2 

M— C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C— M, a sale; the con- 
cluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamor- 
phosis of another. With regard to our weaver, the life of his com- 
modity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. 
But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2 set free by the 
weaver into brandy M— C, the concluding phase of C— M— C 
(linen, money, Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — G 
(Bible, money, brandy). The producer of a particular commodity 
has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large 
quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split 
up the price realised, the sum of money set free, into numerous 
purchases. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various arti- 



1 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an 
exception. He exchanges his product directly for another commodity, with- 
out having first sold it. 

2 "Si I'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons 
desirer d'acheter, il y represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues 
pour cet argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. c, p. 586.) 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES HI 

cles. The concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus con- 
stitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of various other 
commodities. 

If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a com- 
modity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made 
up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and 
M — G. These two antithetical transmutations of a commodity 
are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part 
of the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character 
of the economic parts played by him. As the person who makes 
a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a 
buyer. But just as, upon every such transmutation of a commodity, 
its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist simulta- 
neously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed 
to him, and every buyer a seller. While one particular commodity 
is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a com- 
modity into money and from money into another commodity, 
the owner of the commodity changes in succession his part from 
that of seller to that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer 
are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to 
the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities. 

The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest 
form, implies four extremes, and three dramatis personae. First, 
a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form 
taken by the value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, 
in the pocket of the buyer. A commodity-owner is thus brought into 
contact with a possessor of money. So soon, now, as the commodity 
has been changed into money, the money becomes its transient 
equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is to be 
found in the bodies of other commodities. Money, the final term 
of the first transmutation, is at the same time the starting-point 
for the second. The person who is a seller in the first transaction 
thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity- 
owner appears on the scene as a seller. 1 

The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the 
metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular 
movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, 
and return to the commodity-form. No doubt, the commodity 
appears here under two different aspects. At the starting-point 
it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. So, 
too, the money appears in the first phase as a solid crystal of 

1 "II y a done quatre termes et trois contractants, dont i'un inter- 
view deux t'ois." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 909.) 



112 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

value, a crystal into which the commodity eagerly solidifies, 
and in the second, dissolves into the mere transient equivalent- 
form destined to be replaced by a use-value. 

The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the 
same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other com- 
modities. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series 
of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of 
another (the wheat). In the first phase or sale, the linen plays 
these two parts in its own person. But, then, changed into gold, 
it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, and helps 
at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third 
commodity. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the 
course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up with the 
circuits of other commodities. The total of all the different circuits 
constitutes the circulation of commodities. 

The circulation of commodities differs from the direct ex- 
change of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. 
Only consider the course of events. The weaver has, as a matter 
of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for 
that of some one else. But this is true only so far as he himself 
is concerned. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to 
warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging his Bible for 
linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for 
his linen. B's commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not 
mutually exchange those commodities. It may, of course, happen 
that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the oth- 
er; but such exceptional transactions are by no means the neces- 
sary result of the general conditions of the circulation of commodi- 
ties. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodi- 
ties breaks through all local and personal bounds inseparable from 
direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of 
social labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole 
network of social relations spontaneous in their growth and entire- 
ly beyond the control of the actors. It is only because the farmer 
has sold his wheat that the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, 
only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is 
enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold 
the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to sell 
his eau-de-vie, and so on. 

The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct 
barter of products, become extinguished upon the use-values 
changing places and hands. The money does not vanish on dropping 
out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given commodity. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 113 

It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena 
of circulation vacated by other commodities. In the complete 
metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — money — Bible, 
the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its 
place. Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and again money 
takes its place. When one commodity replaces another, the money- 
commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. 1 
Circulation sweats money from every pore. 

Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because 
every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the 
circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of 
sales and purchases. If this means that the number of actual sales 
is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. But its 
real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to 
market with him. Nothing of the kind. The sale and the purchase 
constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity- 
owner and an owner of money, between two persons as opposed 
to each other as the two poles of a magnet. They form two distinct 
acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one 
single person. Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies 
that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alche- 
mistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the 
shape of money; if, in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, 
and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. That identity 
further implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes 
a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the com- 
modity. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once 
a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process in itself. 
The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., 
a commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. No one 
can sell unless some one else purchases. But no one is forthwith 
bound to purchase, because he has just sold. Circulation bursts 
through all restrictions as to time, place, and individuals, im- 
posed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the 
antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in 
barter does exist between the alienation of one's own and the acqui- 
sition of some other man's product. To say that these two independ- 
ent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially 
one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness expresses itself 
in an external antithesis. If the interval in time between the two 



1 Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unob- 
served by political economists, and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris." 



114 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a com- 
modity become too great, if the split between the sale and the 
purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between 
them, their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. The 
antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private 
labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a 
particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract 
human labour; the contradiction between the personification of 
objects and the representation of persons by things; all these an- 
titheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, 
assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the 
antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity. These 
modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possi- 
bility, of crises. The conversion of this mere possibility into a 
reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our 
present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. * 

b. The currency 2 of money 

The change of form, C — M — G, by which the circulation of 
the material products of labour is brought about, requires that 
a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, 
and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. The move- 
ment of the commodity is therefore a circuit. On the other hand, 
the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made 
by the money. The result is not the return of the money, but its 
continued removal further and further away from its starting- 



1 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &amp;c," pp. 74-76. 
With regard to this subject, we may notice two methods characteristic of 
apologetic economy. The first is the identification of the circulation of com- 
modities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their 
points of difference: the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradic- 
tions of capitalist production, by reducing the relations between the persons 
engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations arising out of 
the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation of commodi- 
ties are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes 
of production the most diverse. If we are acquainted with nothing but the 
abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes 
of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of 
difference of those modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science 
is such a big fuss made with commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. 
For instance, J B Say sets himself up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, 
he knows that a commodity is a product. 

2 Translator's nite. — This word is here used in its original significa- 
tion of the course or track pursued by money as it changes from hand to 
hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H5 

point. So long as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the 
transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity is still in 
the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half 
its course. But so soon as he completes the process, so soon as he 
supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the 
hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the 
Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. But this 
return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; 
that circulation resulted in the money getting i nto the hands of the 
seller of the Bible. The return of money into the hands of the weaver 
is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process 
of circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends 
with the same result as its predecessor did. Hence the movement 
directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities 
takes the form of a constant motion away from its starting-point, 
of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into those of 
another. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie). 
The currency of money is the constant and monotonous 
repetition of the same process. The commodity is always in the 
hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always 
in the hands of the buyer. And money serves as a means of purchase 
by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation transfers 
the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money 
from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again 
goes through the same process with another, commodity. That 
this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the 
two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance 
that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of commodi- 
ties begets the opposite appearance. The first metamorphosis of 
a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also 
that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on 
the contrary, the movement appears to us as the movement of the 
money alone. In the first phase of its circulation the commodity 
changes place with the money. Thereupon the commodity, under 
its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consump- 
tion. 1 In its stead we have its value-shape— the money. It then 
goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its 
own natural shape, but under the shape of money. The continuity 
of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and 



1 Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon 
that at present has no existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the 
last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption, where 
it serves either as means of subsistence or means of production. 



116 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of 
two processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as 
the movement of the money, always one and the same process, 
a continued change of places with ever fresh commodities. Hence 
the result brought about by the circulation of commodities, 
namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the 
appearance of having been effected not by means of the change of 
form of the commodities, but rather by the money acting as a 
medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, 
to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers them 
from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which 
they are use-values; and that in a direction constantly opposed 
to the direction of the money. The latter is continually with- 
drawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their 
places, and in this way continually moving further and further 
from its starting-point. Hence although the movement of the money 
is merely the expression of the circulation of commodities, yet 
the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of 
commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. 1 
Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because 
in it the values of commodities have independent reality. Hence 
its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely 
the movement of commodities while changing their form. This 
fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of 
money. Thus* the linen, for instance, first of all changes its 
commodity-form into its money-form. The second term of its 
first metamorphosis, C — M, the money-form, then becomes the 
first term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into 
the Bible. But each of these two changes of form is accomplished 
by an exchange between commodity and money, by their recip- 
rocal displacement. The same pieces of coin come into the seller's 
hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the 
absolutely alienable form of the commodity. They are displaced 
twice. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into 
the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. The two 
inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected 
in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, 
of the same pieces of coin. 



1 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprim6 
par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 885.) 

* Here (from "Thus the linen..." to "commodities in general," p. 117) 
the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edi- 
tion. — Ed. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H7 

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is 
gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a 
given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second change 
of place always expresses the second metamorphosis of the com- 
modity, its re-conversion from money. The frequent repetition of 
the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of 
metamorphoses that a single commodity has gone through, but 
also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the 
world of commodities in general. It is a matter of course, that all 
this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities alone, 
the only form that we are now considering. 

Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and 
undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circu- 
lation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on 
the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within 
the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. The question 
therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs? 

In a given country there take place every day at the same 
time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamor- 
phoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and nu- 
merous purchases. The commodities are equated beforehand in im- 
agination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money. And 
since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money 
and commodities always come bodily face to face, one at the pos- 
itive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it 
is clear that the amount of the means of circulation required, is 
determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these com- 
modities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the 
quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum 
of the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two sums 
is therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of 
commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value 
of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, 
and falling in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of 
such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of 
commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must 
fall or rise to the same extent. The change in the quantity of the 
circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money 
itself, vet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, 
but of its function as a measure of value. First, the price of the 
commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then 
the quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the 
price of the commodities, Exactly the same thing would happen 



118 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were re- 
placed by silver as the measure of value, or if, instead of the value 
of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the 
measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be current 
than gold was before, in the other case, less gold would be current 
than silver was before. In each case the value of the material of 
money, i.e., the value of the commodity that serves as the meas- 
ure of value, would have undergone a change, and therefore so, 
too, would the prices of commodities which express their values 
in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose 
function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen, that 
the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or 
the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity 
with a given value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a 
measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already 
determined. If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a 
change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bar- 
tered for the precious metals at the sources of their production. The 
greater part of all other commodities, especially in the imperfectly 
developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to 
be estimated by the former antiquated and illusory value of the 
measure of value. Nevertheless, one commodity infects another 
through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed 
in gold or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions 
determined by their comparative values, until finally the values 
of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the 
metal that constitutes money. This process is accompanied by 
the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, 
an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles 
directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In pro- 
portion therefore as commodities in general acquire their true 
prices, in proportion as their values become estimated according 
to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion 
the quantity of that metal necessary for realising those new prices 
is provided beforehand. A one-sided observation of the results 
that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and sil- 
ver, led some economists in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th 
century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities 
had gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and 
silver serving as means of circulation. Henceforth we shall con- 
sider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it'is momentarily 
whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. 

On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of cir- 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H9 

culation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be 
realised. If now we further suppose the price of each commodity 
to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of 
commodities in circulation. It requires but little racking of 
brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 
quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that 
consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the 
wheat, when sold, must increase with the quantity of that wheat. 

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of 
circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of 
those commodities. It increases and diminishes because the sum 
of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the change 
of price. To produce this effect, it is by no means requisite that 
the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. 
A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of leading articles, is 
sufficient in the one case to increase in the other to diminish, the 
sum of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more 
or less money in circulation. Whether the change in the price corre- 
spond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether 
it be the result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect 
on the quantity of the medium of circulation remains the same. 

Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially meta- 
morphosed simultaneously in different localities: say, one quarter 
of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. 
If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be 
realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in money must 
go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same articles are 
links in the following chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — 
£2—20 yards of linen— £2—1 Bible— £2— 4 gallons of brandy— 
£2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 
cause the different commodities to circulate one after the other, 
and after realising their prices successively, and therefore the 
sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket 
of the distiller. The £2 thus make four moves. This repeated change 
of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double 
change in form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite 
directions through two stages of circulation, and to the inter- 
lacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. l These anti- 
thetic and complementary phases, of which the process of meta- 



1 "Ce sont ies productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et 
le font circuler ... La celerite" de son mouvement (sc de l'argent) supplee a 
sa quantite. Lorsqu'il en est besoin, il ne fait que glisser d'une main dans 
l'autre sans s'arreter un instant." (Le Trosne, 1. c, pp 915, 916.) 



120 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

morphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but suc- 
cessively. Time is therefore required for the completion of the se- 
ries. Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by 
the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given 
time. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The 
sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, the number of 
moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of 
money circulating is £2. Hence, for a given interval of time dur- 
ing the process of circulation, we have the following relation: 
the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is 
equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the 
number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. This 
law holds generally. 

The total circulation of commodities in a given country 
during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous 
isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which 
are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its 
place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand, 
of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running 
side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of 
which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number 
being greater or less according to circumstances. The total num- 
ber of moves made by all the circulating coins of one denomina- 
tion being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves 
made by a single coin of that denomination, or at the average 
velocity of the currency of money. The quantity of money thrown 
into the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course de- 
termined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulat- 
ing simultaneously side by side. But once in circulation, coins 
are, so to say, made responsible for one another. If the one in- 
crease its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether 
falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such 
a quantity of gold as when multiplied by the mean number of 
moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the 
prices to be realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the 
separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in cir- 
culation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total 
number of pieces increases. Since the quantity of money capa- 
ble of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean 
velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a 
given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the 
same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to 
all bankers. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 121 

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but 
a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical 
metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that cur- 
rency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change their 
forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses 
with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid 
disappearance of commodities from the sphere of circulation, and 
the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. Hence, 
in the velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the anti- 
thetical and complementary phases, the unity of the conversion 
of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and 
their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity 
of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the other hand, the 
retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two 
processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation 
in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange of 
matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the ori- 
gin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenomenon 
itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retar- 
dation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less fre- 
quently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this 
retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. l 

The total quantity of money functioning during a given 
period as the circulating medium, is determined, on the one 



1 "Money being ... the common measure of buying and selling, every 
body who hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is pres- 
ently apt to think, that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the 
cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common 
cry; which is a great mistake... What do these people want, who cry out for 
money? ... The farmer complains ... he thinks that were more money in the 
country, he should have a price for his goods. Then it seems money is not 
his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... 
Why cannot he get a price? ... (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel 
in the country, so that most who come to market have need of selling, as he 
hath, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by trans- 
portation...; or (3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, 
do not spend so much in their houses as formerly they did; wherefore it is not 
the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the farmer's 
goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down 
the market ... The merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same man- 
ner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they deal in, by reason that the 
markets fail".. [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from 
hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. 1691, 
pp. 11-15, passim.) Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to 
this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the nature of commodi- 
ties, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing 



122 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, 
and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the anti- 
thetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. On this 
rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, 
on the average, be realised by each single coin. But the sum of 
the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, 
as well as on the prices, of the commodities. These three factors, 
however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, 
and velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum 
of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the 
circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the 
numerous variations of these three factors in combination. Of 
these variations we shall consider those alone that have been the 
most important in the history of prices. 

While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulat- 
ing medium may increase owing to the number of circulating 
commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreas- 
ing, or to a combination of the two. On the other hand the quan- 
tity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing 
number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their 
circulation. 

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity 
of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the 
number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally 
to the increase in their prices, or provided the velocity of currency 
increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of commodi- 
ties in circulation remaining constant. The quantity of the cir- 
culating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodi- 
ties decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increas- 
ing more rapidly, than prices rise. 

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quan- 
tity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided 
the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall 
in price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same 
proportion. The quantity of the circulating medium will increase, 
provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the 
rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall. 

The variations of the different factors may mutually compen- 



the circulating medium. But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to 
ascribe stagnation in production and circulation to insufficiency of the cir- 
culating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that an actual 
paucity of the medium in consequence, e.g., of bungling legislative inter- 
ference with the regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 123 

sate each other, so that notwithstanding their continued insta- 
bility, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of 
money in circulation remain constant; consequently, we find, 
especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the 
deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money current 
in any country, are much smaller than we should at first sight 
expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically 
arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, less frequently, 
from fluctuations in the value of money. 

The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is 
determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities circu- 
lating, and the average velocity of currency 1 may also be stated 
as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the 
average rapidity of their metamorphoses, the quantity of pre- 
cious metal current as money depends on the value of that precious 
metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices 
that are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, 
and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious 

1 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to 
drive the trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. 
Just as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail 
trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be ad- 
justed with the smallest silver pieces.... Now, as the proportion of the num- 
ber of farthings requisite in commerce is to be taken from the number of 
people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the 
value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the propor- 
tion of money [gold and silver specie] requisite in our trade, is to be like- 
wise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of 
the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." 
Lond. 1667, p. 17.) The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks 
of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his "Political Arithmetic," Lond. 
1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on 
quantity of money," at p. 112, squ. 1 have stated in "Zur Kritik, &amp;c," p. 
149: "He (Adam Smith) passes over without remark the question as to the 
quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly as a mere 
commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex offi- 
cio, treats of money. Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the ear- 
lier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right view. "The quantity of 
coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which 
are to be circulated by it.... The value of the goods annually bought and sold 
in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and dis- 
tribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. 
The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to 
fill it, and never admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. I.) 
In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work with an apotheosis on the divi- 
sion of labour. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of 
public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of 
labour made by his teacher, A. Ferguson. 



124 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



metals in a country; 1 this opinion was based by those who first 
held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a 
price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circu- 
lation, and that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the 
medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot part of the 
heap of precious metals. 2 

c. Coin and symbols of value 

That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function 
as the circulating medium. The weight of gold represented in 
imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must 
confront those commodities, within the circulation, in the shape 
of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination. Coining, like 

1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold 
and silver increase amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold 
and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must fall propor- 
tionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers 
all Things." Lond, 1734, p. 5.) A careful comparison of this book with 
Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt that Hume was acquainted 
with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one. 
The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating 
medium, was also held by Barbon and other much earlier writers. "No incon- 
venience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an unrestrained trade, but very 
great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which 
prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will 
certainly find everything advance in price, as the cash increases amongst 
them. And ... our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so 
moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the 
money back again." (1. c, pp. 43, 44.) 

2 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a part of the 
sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation, is a self-evident 
proposition. But how use-values, which are incommensurable with regard to 
each other, are to be exchanged, en masse, for the total sum of gold and silver 
in a country, is quite incomprehensible. If we start from the notion that all 
commodities together form one single commodity, of which each is but an 
aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total commodity=x 
cwt. of gold; commodity A=an aliquot part of the total commodity =the 
same aliquot part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all seriousness by Mon- 
tesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor et de l'argent qui est dans le 
monde avec la somme des marchandises qui y sont, il est certain que chaque 
denree ou marchandise, en particulier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine 
portion de la masse entiere. Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree, ou 
marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule qui s'achete, et qu' 
eile se divise comme l'argent: Cette partie de cette marchandise repondra a 
une partie de la masse de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moilie 
du total de l'autre, &amp;c. ... l'etablissement du prix des choses depend ton jours 
fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes." (Mon- 
tesquieu, I. c. t. Ill, pp. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory 
by Ricardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 125 

the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the 
State. The different national uniforms worn at home by gold and 
silver as coins, and doffed again in the market of the world, indi- 
cate the separation between the internal or national spheres of 
the circulation of commodities, and their universal sphere. 

The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is 
one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to 
the other. 1 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it im- 
mediately finds itself on the high-road to the melting pot. During 
their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less. Name 
and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their 
process of separation. Coins of the same denomination become 
different in value, because they are different in weight. The 
weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates 
from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and the 



"Zur Kritik, &amp;c," pp. 140-146, and p. 150, sqq. John Stuart Mill, with 
his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view 
of his father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the 
text of his compendium, "Principles of Pol. Econ.," with his preface to the 
first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith 
of his day— we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the 
man, or that of the public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith 
he announced himself to be, although he bears about as much resemblance 
to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington. 
The original researches of Mr. J. S. Mill, which are neither extensive nor 
profound, in the domain of Political Economy, will be found mustered in 
rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions of Political 
Economy," which appeared in 1844. Locke asserts point blank the connex- 
ion between the absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination 
of their values by quantity alone. "Mankind having consented to put an 
imaginary value upon gold and silver ... the intrinsick value, regarded in 
these metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &amp;c, 
1691, Works Ed. 1777, vol. II., p. 15.) 

1 It lies, of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into considera- 
tion such details as the seigniorage on minting. I will, however, cite for the 
benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Miiller, who admires the "generous 
liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the fol- 
lowing opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodi- 
ties, have their ebbings and flowings. Upon the arrival of quantities from 
Spain ... it is carried into the Tower, and coined. Not long after there will 
come a demand for bullion to be exported again. If there is none, but all 
happens to be in coin, what then? Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, 
for the coining costs the owner nothing. Thus the nation has been abused, 
and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. If the merchant 
were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver 
to the Tower without consideration; and coined money would always keep 
a value above uncoined silver." (North, 1. c, p. 18.) North was himself one 
of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II. 



126 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the com- 
modities whose prices it realises. The history of coinage during 
the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever 
renewed confusion arising from this cause. The natural tendency 
of circulation to convert coins into a mere semblance of what they 
profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are offi- 
cially supposed to contain, is recognised by modern legislation, 
which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, 
or to make it no longer legal tender. 

The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation 
between their nominal and their real weight, creating a distinc- 
tion between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and 
as coins with a definite function on the other — this fact implies 
the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of some 
other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. 
The practical difficulties in the way of coining extremely minute 
quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first 
the less precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of 
the more precious, copper instead of silver, silver instead of gold, 
and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by 
the more precious— all these facts explain the parts historically 
played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins. 
Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions 
of the circulation where coins pass from hand to hand most rapid- 
ly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. 
This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are 
continually happening. In order to prevent these satellites from 
establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive 
enactments determine the extent to which they must be compul- 
sorily received as payment instead of gold. The particular tracks 
pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally 
into each other. The tokens keep company with gold, to pa) frac- 
tional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, con- 
stantly pouring into retail circulation, and on the other hand is as 
constantly being thrown out again by being changed into tokens. * 
The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbi- 
trarily fixed by law. When in currency, they wear away even 
more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are totally 
independent of their weight, and consequently of all value. The 
function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the 
metallic value of that gold. Therefore things tljat are relatively 

1 "If silver never exceed what is wanted tor the smaller payments, it 
cannot be collected in sufficient quantities ioi the larger payments ... the 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 127 

without value, such as paper notes, can serve as coins in its 
place. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked 
in metal tokens. In paper money it stands out plainly. In fact, 
ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute. 

We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by 
the State and having compulsory circulation. It has its immediate 
origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon credit implies 
on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the 
simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown 
to us. But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money 
takes its rise in the function of money as the circulating medium, 
so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the func- 
tion of money as the means of payment. 1 

The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their 
various denominations, say £1, £5, &amp;c, are printed. In so far 
as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their 
movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of 
money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money 
can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper 
money represents gold. Such a law exists; stated simply, it is as 
follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount 
the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually 

use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also its use in the re- 
tail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and 
receiving with the commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by 
which means the surplus of silver that would otherwise encumber the retail 
dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. But if there is 
as much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the 
retail trader must then receive silver for small purchases; and it must of neces- 
sity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan "Inquiry into the Taxation 
and Commercial Policy of Great Britain." Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 248, 249.) 
1 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
took it into his head one day to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal 
that secretly aimed at converting the asstgnats of the empire into convert- 
ible bank-notes. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, 
gives him a severe snubbing Whether he also received the traditional drub- 
bing with bamboos is not stated. The concluding part of the report is as 
follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds 
that it is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will 
result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu 
Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K Abel und F. A Mecklen- 
burg. Erster Band Berlin, 1858, p. 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Com- 
mittee of the House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of 
England says, with regard to the abrasion of gold coins during currency: 
"Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. The class which 
one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the 
scales next year against it." (House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 429.) 



128 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the quantity of gold 
which the circulation can absorb, constantly fluctuates about a 
given level. Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given 
country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by 
actual experience. The fact that this minimum mass continually un- 
dergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold 
of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, 
causes of course no change either in its amount or in the continuity 
of its circulation. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. 
If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day 
filled with paper money to the full extent of their capacity for 
absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in con- 
sequence of a fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. 
There would no longer be any standard. If the paper money 
exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the 
like denomination that can actually be current, it would, apart 
from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only 
that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the 
circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone capable of 
being represented by paper. If the quantity of paper money issued 
be double what it ought to be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would 

1 1 

be the money-name not of -r of an ounce, but of -~ of an ounce 

of gold. The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken 
place in the function of gold as a standard of prices. Those values 
that were previously expressed by the price of £1 would now be 
expressed by the price of £2. 

Paper money is a token representing gold or money. The 
relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that 
the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold 
that are symbolically represented by the paper. Only in so far as 
paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities 
has value, is it a symbol of value. x 

Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being 
replaced by tokens that have no value? But, as we have already 
seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions 
exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing 
else. Now, money has other functions besides this one, and the 
isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is 
not necessarily the only one attached to gold coin, although this 



1 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness 
on the part of even the best writers on money, in their comprehension of its 
various functions: "That, as far as concerns our domestic exchanges, all the 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 129 

is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. 
Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only 
so long as it actually circulates. But this is just the case with that 
minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by 
paper money. That mass remains constantly within the sphere 
of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and 
exists exclusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore 
represents nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse 
phases of the metamorphosis G— M— C, phases in which commodi- 
ties confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immedi- 
ately. The independent existence of the exchange-value of a com- 
modity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the com- 
modity is immediately replaced by another commodity. Hence, 
in this process which continually makes money pass from hand 
to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. Its 
functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence. 
Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodi- 
ties, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable 
of being replaced by a token. l One thing is, however, requisite; 
this token must have an objective social validity of its own, 
and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. This 
compulsory action of the State can take effect only within that 
inner sphere of circulation which is co-terminous with the terri- 
tories of the community, but it is also only within that sphere 
that money completely responds to its function of being the cir^ 
culating medium, or becomes coin. 



monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, 
may be performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes, 
having no value but that factitious and conventional value they derive 
from the law, is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. Value of this 
description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and 
supersede even the necessity for a standard, provided only the quantity of 
issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullarton: "Regulation of Currencies," 
London, 1845, p. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is ca- 
pable of being replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore 
its functions as a measure of value and a standard of prices are declared to 
be superfluous! 

1 From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclu- 
sively serve as the medium of circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, 
Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments 'to raise money," that 
is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a 
greater weight, such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of 
crowns "Money does wear and grow lighter by often telling over... It is the 
denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining, and 
not the quantity of silver... Tis the public authority upon the metal that 
makes it money." (N. Barbon, 1. c. f pp 29, 30, 25.) 



130 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 3.— MONEY 

The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, 
either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium 
of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It 
functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present 
in its own golden person. It is then, the money-commodity, nei- 
ther merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor 
capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating 
medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by 
virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in per- 
son or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value, 
the only adequate form of existence of exchange-value, in opposi- 
tion to use-value, represented by all other commodities. 

a. Hoarding 

The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical 
metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation 
of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, 
or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum mobile 
of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is in- 
terrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent 
purchases, money ceases to be mobilised; it is transformed, as 
Boisgiuillebensays, from "meuble" into "immeuble," from mov- 
able into immovable, from coin into money. 

With the very earliest development of the circulation of 
commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the pas- 
sionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. 
This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its 
gold-chrysalis. l Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose 
of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form 
by their money-form. From being the mere means of effecting 
the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the 
end and aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus pre- 
vented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or 
as its merely transient money-form. The money becomes petri- 
fied into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money. 

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is 
the surplus use-values alone that are converted into money. 



1 "Une richesse en argent n'est que... richesse en^productiohs, conver- 
ges en argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a 
fait que changer de forme." (Id., p. 486.) 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 131 

Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions 
for superfluity or wealth. This naive form of hoarding becomes 
perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode 
of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited 
circle of home wants. It is thus with the people of Asia, and partic- 
ularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices 
of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity 
of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian com- 
modities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their 
money. From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions 
of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from America 
to Europe. x In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported 
to India and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been re- 
ceived in exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver exported 
to China makes its way to India. 

As the production of commodities further develops, every 
producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus 
rerum or the social pledge. 2 His wants are constantly making 
themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other 
people's commodities, while the production and sale of his own 
goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. In order then to 
be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without 
buying. This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to 
imply a contradiction. But the precious metals at the sources 
of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities. 
And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without 
purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). 3 And subsequent 
sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring 
about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals 
among all the owners of commodities. In this way, all along 
the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent 
are accumulated. With the possibility of holding and storing 
up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, 
arises also the greed for gold. Along with the extension of 
circulation, increases the power of money, that absolutely social 
form of wealth ever ready for use. "Gold is a wonderful thing! 
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means oi 



1 "Tis by this practice they keep all their goods and manufactures at 
such low rates." (Vanderlint, 1. c, pp. 95, 96.) 

2 "Money ... is a pledge." (John Bellers: "Essays about the Poor, Manu- 
factures, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality," Lond., 1699, p. 13.) 

3 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are 
already the converted form of commodities, or the product of a sale. 



132 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his 
letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what 
has been transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, 
is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable. 
The circulation becomes the great social retort into which every- 
thing is thrown, to come out again as a gold-crystal. Not even are 
the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosan- 
cta?, extra commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. 1 
Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is ex- 
tinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller 
that it is, does away with all distinctions. 2 But money itself is a 
commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the private 
property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private 
power of private persons. The ancients therefore denounced money 
as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. 3 Modern 
society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of 



1 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their 
relics, and turned them into money. It is well known what part the despoil- 
ing of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece. 
Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodi- 
ties. They were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par 
excellence, money was the transmuted shape of everything. It was, there- 
fore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of Love, 
gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of 
money they received. 

2 "Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold! 

Thus much of this, will make black white; foul, fair; 

Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant. 

... What this, you gods? Why, this 

Will lug your priests and servants from your sides; 

Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads; 

This yellow slave 

Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd; 

Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves, 

And give them title, knee and approbation, 

With senators on the bench; this is it, 

That makes the wappen'd widow wed again: 

... Come damned earth, 

Thou common whore of mankind." 

(Shakespeare: Timon of Athens.) 
3 "Oo5sv ydp avOpcmroiaiv otv ap*ft&gt;po&lt;; 

Kaxov voptiajia tfUaate- touto xai n6Xgt&lt;; 

IIopQel, x68' avopa&lt;; eSavtaTTjaiv 66[ia&gt;v. 

Tod' IxStoiaxet xai rcapaMaaaei cppsvcn; 

XpTpxdq Ttpo? a tap a av9p&lt;ott0t&lt;; /ptv, 

Kai rccmdi; ip^oo Suaaejietav ei&lt;5evat." 

(Sophocles, Antigone.) 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 133 

his head from the bowels of the earth, 1 greets gold as its Holy Grail, 
as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life. 

A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a par- 
ticular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. 
But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction 
for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures 
the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian owner of commodi- 
ties, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as 
value-form, and therefore, to him the increase in his hoard of 
gold and silver is an increase in value. It is true that the value 
of money varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its 
own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values 
of commodities. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 
200 ounces of gold from still containing more value than 100 
ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic 
form of this article from continuing to be the universal equiva- 
lent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social 
incarnation of all human labour. The u:sire after hoarding is 
in its very nature unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally 
considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is the 
universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly 
convertible into any other commodity. But, at the same time, 
every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, 
as a means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. This antago- 
nism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualita- 
tive boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his 
Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating. It is with him as it is 
with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only 
a new boundary. 

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form 
a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from trans- 
forming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, 
makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He 
acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, 
he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has 
thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The more he produces, 
the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, 
therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy 
little the sum of his political economy. 2 



1 "'EXiuCouot)? Trj$ 7iXeove$ta&lt;; dva$eiv ix xuiv |iuxu&gt;v tyj&lt;; *f"?i&lt;; a-JTov tov IUoutcova" 
(Athen. Deipnos.) 

2 "Accrescere quanto pill si pu6 il numero de'venditori d'ogrii merce, 
diminuere quanto piu si pud il numero dei compratori, questi sono i cardini 



134 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its 
aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. This 
grows with the wealth of civil society. "Soyons riches ou parais- 
sons riches" (Diderot). In this way there is created, on the one 
hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, uncon- 
nected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a 
latent source of supply, to which recourse is had principally in 
times of crisis and social disturbance. 

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the met- 
allic circulation. Its first function arises out of the conditions 
to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We 
have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the ex- 
tent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their 
prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. 
This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion and contrac- 
tion. At one time money must be attracted in order to act as 
circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled 
in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. In order 
that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate 
the absorbing power of the circulation, it is necessary that the 
quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quan- 
tity required to function as coin. This condition is fulfilled by 
money taking the form of hoards. These reserves serve as con- 
duits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circu- 
lation, which in this way never overflows its banks. x 

b. Means of Payment 

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto 
considered, we found a given value always presented to us in a 
double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the oppo- 
site pole. The owners of commodities came therefore into contact 
as the respective representatives of what were already equivalents. 
But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under 
which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an 



sui quali si raggirauo tutte le operazioni di economia politica." (Verri, 
1. c, p. 52.) 

1 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determi- 
nate sum of specifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, some- 
times less, as the circumstances we are in require.... This ebbing and flowing 
of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... 
The buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when 
bullion is scarce, money is melted." (Sir D. North, 1. c, Postscript, p. 3.) 
John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the East India Com- 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 135 

interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. It will 
be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. 
One sort of article requires a longer, another a shorter time for 
its production. Again, the production of different commodities 
depends on different seasons of the year. One sort of commodity 
may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long 
journey to market. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be 
ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. When the same trans- 
actions are continually repeated between the same persons, the 
conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions 
of production. On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, 
of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a 
definite period. Here, it is only at the end of the term that the 
buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. He 
therefore buys it before he pays for it. The vendor sells an exist- 
ing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative 
of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes a cred- 
itor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. Since the metamorphosis 
of commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears 
here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; 
it becomes the means of payment. 

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the 
simple circulation. The change in the form of that circulation 
stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, 
these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of 
seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. 
But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more 
capable of crystallisation. x The same characters can, however, 
be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. 
The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly 
of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended 
in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. 
In the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal 

pany, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to per- 
form directly the functions of a hoard. The silver ornaments are brought 
out and coined when there is a high rate of interest, and go back again when 
the rate of interest falls. (J. S. Mill's Evidence. "Reports on Bank Acts," 
1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864, on the gold 
and silver import and export of India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 
exceeded the export by £ 19,367,764. During the 8 years immediately pre- 
ceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amount- 
ed to £109,652,917. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has 
been coined in India. 

1 The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing be- 
tween English traders at the beginning of the 18th century. "Such a spirit of 



136 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic 
basis on which it was established. Nevertheless, the money 
relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods 
reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general 
economic conditions of existence of the classes in question. 

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appear- 
ance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the t'svo 
poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The 
money functions now, first as a measure of value in the determi- 
nation of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by 
the contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of 
money that he has to pay at a fixed date. Secondly, it serves as 
an ideal means of purchase. Although existing only in the promise 
of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. 
It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of pay- 
ment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer 
for that of the seller. The circulating medium was transformed 
into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first 
phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the 
money, was withdrawn from circulation. The means of payment 
enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left 
it. The money is no longer the means that brings about the process. 
It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of 
existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The 
seller turned his commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy 
some want; the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity 
in its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; 
if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the sheriff. The value- 
form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim 
of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of 
the process of circulation itself. 

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he 
has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves 
the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The 
seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in 
the shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a 
use-value before it has been converted into money. The completion 
of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later period. 1 



cruelty reigns here in England among the men of trade, that is not to be 
met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." 
("An Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act," Lond., 1707, p. 2.) 

1 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which 
appeared in 1859, why I take no notice in the text of an opposite form: 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 137 

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent 
the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave 
rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold necessary to realise 
this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency 
of the means of payment. That quantity is conditioned by two 
circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors 
form a sort of chain, in such a way that A, when he receives money 
from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to G his creditor, 
and so on; the second circumstance is the length of the intervals 
between the different due-days of the obligations. The continuous 
chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially 
different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses 
which we considered on a former page. By the currency of the 
circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, 
is not merely expressed. This connexion is originated by, and 
exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the movement of 
the means of payment expresses a social relation that was in 
existence long before. 

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, 
and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced 
by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new 
lever in economising the means of payment. In proportion as 
payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and 
methods are developed for their liquidation. Such in the middle 
ages were the virements at Lyons. The debts due to A from B, 
to B from C, to G from A, and so on, have only to be confronted 
with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent 
like positive and negative quantities. There thus remains only 
a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the payments 
concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, 
and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circula- 
tion. 

The function of money as the means of payment implies a 
contradiction without a terminus medius. In so far as the 



"Contrariwise, in the process M — G, the money can be alienated as a real 
means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be 
realised before the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity 
actually delivered. This occurs constantly under the every-day form of pre- 
payments. And it is under this form, that the English government purchases 
opium from the ryots of India.... In these cases, however, the money always 
acts as a means of purchase.... Of course capital also is advanced in the 
shape of money.... This point of view, however, does not fall within the 
horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &amp;c," pp. 119, 120.) 



138 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as 
money of account, as a measure of value. In so far as actual pay- 
ments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating 
medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, 
but as the individual incarnation of social labour, as the inde- 
pendent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal com- 
modity. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of indus- 
trial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises. 1 
Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of 
payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been 
fully developed. Whenever there is a general and extensive dis- 
turbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money 
becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its merely 
ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. Profane commodi- 
ties can no longer replace it. The use-value of commodities be- 
comes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own 
independent form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with 
the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, 
declares money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone are 
money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commod- 
ity! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul after 
money, the only wealth. 2 In a crisis, the antithesis between com- 
modities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into 
an absolute contradiction. Hence, in such events, the form under 
which money appears is of no importance. The money famine 
continues, whether payments have to be made in gold or in 
credit money such as bank-notes. 3 



1 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every 
crisis, must be clearly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which 
also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be produced by itself as an 
independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on indus- 
try and commerce. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capi- 
tal, and their sphere of direct action is therefore the sphere of that capital, 
viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance. 

2 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard 
cash heaps theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers 
by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the impenetrable 
mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 
1. c, p. 126). "The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to em- 
ploy them, though they have the same land and hands to provide victuals 
and clothes, as ever they had;... which is the true Riches of a Nation, and not 
the money." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry." 
Lond. 1696, p. 3.) 

3 The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis 
du commerce." "On one occasion (1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 139 

If we now consider the sum total of the money current dur- 
ing a given period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of cur- 
rency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, 
it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of 
the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each 
other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same 
piece of coin serves in turn as means of circulation and of payment. 
Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent 
of the economy in payments, are given, the quantity of money 
current and the mass of commodities circulating during a given 
period, such as a day, no longer correspond. Money that represents 
commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be 
current. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money 
will not appear on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the 
debts contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the 
same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. 1 

Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money 
as a means of payment. Certificates of the debts owing for the 
purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring 
those debts to others. On the other hand, to the same extent as 
the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money 
as a means of payment. In that character it takes various forms 
peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere 



in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to 
a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £ 600,000 
of them, they were held to make money tight, and would all be let out after 
three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of Exchanges. The Bank Charter 
Act of 1844." Lond. 1864, p. 81.) The Observer, a semi-official government 
organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very 
curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted to in 
order to create a scarcity of bank-notes.... Questionable as it would seem, lo 
suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so 
universal that it really deserves mention." 

1 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course 
of any given day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that partic- 
ular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into 
multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at sub- 
sequent dates more or less distant.... The bills granted or credits opened, 
to-day, need have no resemblance whatever, either in quantity, amount, or 
duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow .or next day; nay, 
many of to-day's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabil- 
ities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, 
bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the common 
liabilities of one particular day..." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a 
Letter to the Scottish people." By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 1845, 
pp. 29, 30 passim.) 



140 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver coin, on the 
other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade. 1 
When the production of commodities has sufficiently ex- 
tended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment 
beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. It becomes 
the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all con- 
tracts. 2 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed 
from payments in kind into money payments. To what extent 
this transformation depends upon the general conditions of pro- 
duction, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the 
Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions 
in money. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural 
population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced 
by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and others, was due not 
only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes 
in kind into money taxes. 3 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact 
that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, 



1 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commer- 
cial operations, I give below a statement by one of the largest London houses 
of its yearly receipts and payments. Its transactions during the year 1856, 
extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the 
scale of one million. 

Receipts. Payments. 

Bankers' and Merchants' Bills payable after date, £302,674 
Bills payable after Cheques on London Bank- 
date, £533,596 ers 663,672 

Cheques on Bankers, &amp;c, Bank of England Notes, 22,743 

payable on demand, 357,715 Gold, 9,427 

Country Notes, 9,627 Silver and Copper, . . . 1,484 

Bank of England Notes, 68,554 

Gold, 28,089 

Silver and Copper, . . 1.484 

Post Office Orders, . . 933 



Total, . . £1,000,000 Total, . . .£1,000,000 

"Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858," 
p. Ixxi. 

2 "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for 
goods, or delivering and taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains ... 
are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money." ("An Essay upon Publick 
Credit." 3rd Ed. Lond., 1710, p. 8.) 

8 "L'argent ... est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is 
the "alambic, qui a fait evaporer une quantite effroyable de biens et de den- 
izes pour faire ce fatal precis." "L'argent declare la guerre a tout lc genre 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 141 

depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with 
the regularity of natural phenomena. And this mode of payment 
tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. It 
is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. 
If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should 
lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will 
be all up with the exemplary agriculture of that country. The 
narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is 
carried on, will be swept away. 

In every country, certain days of the year become by habit 
recognised settling days for various large and recurrent payments. 
These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel 
of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with the seasons. 
They also regulate the dates for payments that have no direct 
connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, 
rents, and so on. The quantity of money requisite to make the 
payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes 
periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy 
of the medium of payment. 1 

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of 
payment, it follows that the quantity of the means of payment 
required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is 
in inverse proportion to the length of their periods. 2 



humain." (Boisguillebert: "Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de I'ar- 
gent et des tributs." Edit. Daire. Economistes financiers. Paris, 1843. 
t.i., pp. 413, 419, 417.) 

1 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Com- 
mittee of 1826, "there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks 
of Edinburgh, that by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. 
They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, 
and many of the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by 
three o'clock the whole of the notes were returned into the banks from which 
they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand." Although Hie 
average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three 
millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, every single note in 
the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about £7,000,000, 
is called into activity. On these occasions the notes have a single and speci t- 
ic function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back 
into the various banks from which they issued. (See John Fullarton, "Regu- 
lation of Currencies." Lond. 1845, p. 86, note.) In explanation it should he 
stated, that in Scotland, at the dateof Fullarton'swork, notes and not cheques 
were used to withdraw deposits. 

2 To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. a., 
whether the same 6 millions (gold)... would suffice for such revolutions and 
circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual masterly 
manner, "I answer yes: for the expense being 40 millions, if the revolutions 



142 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



The development of money into a medium of payment makes 
it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for 
the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as a distinct 
mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil so- 
ciety, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows 
with that progress. 



c. Universal Money 

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips 
off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, 
of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its 
original form of bullion. In the trade between the markets of the 
world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be univer- 
sally recognised. Hence their independent value-form also, in 
these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money. 
It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the 
full extent the character of the commodity whose bodily form is 
also the immediate social incarnation of human labour in the 
abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately 
corresponds to its ideal concept. 

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one 
commodity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes 
money. In the markets of the world a double measure of value 
holds sway, gold and silver. 1 



were in such short circles, viz., weekly, as happens among poor artisans 
and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday, then -tk parts of 1 mil- 
lion of money would answer these ends; but if the circles be quarterly, ac- 
cording to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions 
were requisite. Wherefore, supposing payments in general to be of a mixed 

circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to r^, the half of which 

will be 5-7p, so as if we have 5-y millions we have enough." (William Petty: 

"Political Anatomy of Ireland." 1672. Edit.: Lond. 1691, pp. 13, 14.) 

1 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a 
country shall form reserves of that precious metal alone which circulates 
at home. The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank 
of England, are well known. On the subject of the great epochs in 
the history of the changes in the relative value of gold and silver, 
see Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 136 sq. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844. 
sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England 
to issue notes against silver bullion, on condition that the reserve of silver 
should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold. The value 
of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market. 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 143 

Money of the world serves as the universal medium of pay- 
ment, as the universal means of purchasing, and as the univer- 
sally recognised embodiment of all wealth. Its function as a means 
of payment in the settling of international balances is its chief 
one. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of 
trade. * Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing 

[Added in the 4th German edition. — We find ourselves once more in a period 
of serious change in the relative values of gold and silver. About 25 years 
ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and silver was 15-|-:1; 

now it is approximately 22:1, and silver is still constantly falling as against 
gold. This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production 
of both metals. Formerly gold was obtained almost exclusively by washing 
it out from gold-bearing alluvial deposits, products of the weathering of au- 
riferous rocks. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced 
into the background by the processing of the quartz lodes themselves, 
a way of extraction which formerly was only of secondary importance, al- 
though well known to the ancients (Diodorus, III, 12-14) (Diodor's v. 
Sicilien "Historische Bibliothek," book III, 12-14. Stuttgart 1828, pp. 258- 
261). Moreover, not only were new huge silver deposits discovered in North 
America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but these and the 
Mexican silver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which 
made possible the shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence 
the mining of silver on a very large scale at a low cost. However, there is a great 
difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. The gold is most- 
ly native, but disseminated throughout the quartz in minute quantities. The 
whole mass of the vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed 
out or extracted by means of mercury. Often 1,000,000 grammes of quartz 
barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. Silver is seldom 
found native; however it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the 
lode with comparative ease and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is 
contained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores which in 
themselves are worthwhile working. From this alone it is apparent that the 
labour expended on the production of gold is rather increasing while that 
expended on silver production has decidedly decreased, which quite natu- 
rally explains the drop in the value of the latter. This fall in value would 
express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not 
pegged even to-day by artificial means. But America's rich silver deposits 
have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that the value of 
this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. A still great- 
er contributing factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of 
silver for articles of general use and for luxuries, that is its replacement by 
plated goods, aluminium, etc. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the 
bimetallist idea that compulsory international quotation will raise silver 

again to the old value ratio of 1:15-^-. It is more likely that silver will for- 
feit its money function more and more in the markets of the world. — F. E.\ 
1 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which 
considered the settlement of surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the 
aim of international trade, entirely misconceived the functions of money of 
the world. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false 
conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, 



144 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



chiefly and necessarily in those periods when the customary equi- 
librium in the interchange of products between different nations 
is suddenly disturbed. And lastly, it serves as the universally 
recognised embodiment of social wealth, whenever the question 
is not of buying or paying, but of transferring wealth from one 
country to another, and whenever this transference in the form 
of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special conjunc- 
tures in the markets, or by the purpose itself that is intended. l 
Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home 
circulation, so, too, it requires one for external circulation in 
the markets of the world. The functions of hoards, therefore, 
arise in part out of the function of money, as the medium of the 
home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its 
function of money of the world. 2 For this latter function, the 
genuine money-commodity, actual gold and silver, is necessary. 
On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them 
from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money 
of the world." 

is reflected in their equally false conception of the international movement 
of the precious metals (1. c, pp. 150 sq.). His erroneous dogma: "An unfa- 
vourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency.... The 
exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but 
the cause of an unfavourable balance," already occurs in Barbon: "The Bal- 
ance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the money 
out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion 
in every country." (N. Barbon; 1. c, pp. 59, 60.) AlacCulloch in "The Litera- 
ture of Political Economy, a classified catalogue, Lond. 1845," praises Bar- 
bon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which 
Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" is 
based. The absence of real criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue 
culminates in the sections devoted to the history of the theory of money; 
the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Over- 
stone whom he calls "facile princeps argentariorum." 

1 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for 
enabling banks to resume cash payments, &amp;c, it is the money-form, and no 
other, of value that may be wanted. 

2 "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the compe- 
tency of the machinery of the hoards in specie-paying countries to perform 
every necessary office of international adjustment, without any sensible 
aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when 
but just recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, complet- 
ed within the space of 27 months the payment of her forced contribution 
of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable proportion 
of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of 
her domestic currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges." 
(Fullarton, 1. c, p. 141.) [Added in the 4th German edition. — We have a 
still more striking example in the facility with whioh the same France was 
able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than 
ten times as great, a considerable part of it likewise in specie. — F E.\ 



MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 145 

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. 
On the one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the 
markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various 
extents, into the different national spheres of circulation, to 
fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and silver 
coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to petrify 
into hoards. 1 This first current is started by the countries that 
exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour 
embodied in the precious metals by gold and silver-producing 
countries. On the other hand, there is a continual flowing back- 
wards and forwards of gold and silver between the different nation- 
al spheres of circulation, a current whose motion depends on the 
ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange. 2 

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is de- 
veloped to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in 
the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the 
proper performance of their peculiar functions. 3 Whenever these 
hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some 
exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of com- 
modities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamor- 
phoses. 4 



1 "L'argent se partage entre les nations relativement au besoin qu'elles 
en ont ... etant toujours attire par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 916.) 
"The mines which are continually giving gold and silver, do give sufficient 
to supply such a needful balance to every nation." (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 40.) 

2 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times 
in the year run high against a nation, and at other times run as high on the 
contrary." (N. Barbon, 1. c, p. 39.) 

3 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conllict 
with one another whenever gold and silver have also to serve as a fund for 
the conversion of bank-notes. 

4 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Irade, 
is dead stock ... and brings no profit to that country it's kept in, but as it 
is transported in trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers, "Essays," p. 13.) 
"What if we have too much coin? We may melt down the heaviest and turn 
it into the splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver; or send 
it out as a commodity, where the same is wanted or desired; or let it out at 
interest, where interest is high." (W. Petty: "Quantulumcunque " p. 39.) 
"Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much doth as oiten 
hinder its agility, as too little makes it sick ... as fat lubricates the motion 
of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven cavities and 
beautifies the body; so doth money in the state quicken its action, leeds irom 
abroad in time of dearth at home; evens accounts ... and beautifies the whole; 
altho more especially the particular persons that have it in plenty. "(W. Pet- 
ty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. 14.) 



146 



PART II 



THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO 
CAPITAL 



CHAPTER IV 
THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 

The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. 
The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more 
developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form 
the historical ground-work from which it rises. The modern 
history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th century of 
a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market. 

If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation 
of commodities, that is, from the exchange of the various use- 
values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this 
process of circulation, we find its final result to be money: this 
final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form 
in which capital appears. 

As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, 
invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed 
wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. * But 
we have no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to dis- 
cover that the first form of appearance of capital is money. We 
can see it daily under our very eyes. All new capital, to commence 
with, comes on the stage, that is, on the market, whether of com- 
modities, labour, or money, even in our days, in the shape of 
money that by a definite process has to be transformed into capital. 

The first distinction we notice between money that is money 
only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a differ- 
ence in their form of circulation. 

The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C — 
M— C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the 



1 The contrast between the power, based on the personal relations of 
dominion and servitude, that is conferred by landed property, and the imper- 
sonal power that is given by money, is well expressed by the two French 
proverbs, "Nulle terre sans seigneur," and "L'argent n'a pas de maitre" 



THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 147 

change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in 
order to buy. But alongside of this form we find another specifi- 
cally different form: M— C— M, the transformation of money 
into commodities, and the change of commodities back again 
into money; or buying in order to sell. Money that circulates in 
the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, 
and is already potentially capital. 

Now let us examine the circuit M— C— M a little closer. It 
consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases. In the first 
phase, M — G, or the purchase, the money is changed into a com- 
modity. In the second phase, C— M, or the sale, the commodity 
is changed back again into money. The combination of these two 
phases constitutes the single movement whereby money is ex- 
changed for a commodity, and the same commodity is again 
exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order 
to be sold, or, neglecting the distinction in form between buying 
and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with money, and 
then money is bought with a commodity. x The result, in which 
the phases of the process vanish, is the exchange of money for 
money, M— M. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £100, and 
resell the 2,000 lbs. of cotton for £110, I have, in fact, exchanged 
£100 for £110, money for money. 

Now it is evident that the circuit M — C — M would be absurd 
and without meaning if the intention were to exchange by this 
means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. The miser's plan 
would be far simpler and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of 
exposing it to the dangers of circulation. And yet, whether the 
merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton sells it for £110, or 
lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money has, at all events, gone 
through a characteristic and original movement, quite different 
in kind from that which it goes through in the hands of the peas- 
ant who sells corn, and with the money thus set free buys clothes. 
We have therefore to examine first the distinguishing characteris- 
tics of the forms of the circuits M— C— M and C— M— C, and in 
doing this the real difference that underlies the mere difference 
of form will reveal itself. 

Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in 
common. 

Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical 
phases, C— M, a sale, and M— C, a purchase. In each of these phases 

1 "Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises et avec des marchan- 
dises on achete de l'argent." (Merrier de la Riviere: "L'ordre naturel et es- 
sentiel des societes politiques," p. 543.) 



148 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the same material elements— a commodity, and money, and 
the same economic dramatis personse, a buyer and a seller — con- 
front one another. Each circuit is the unity of the same two an- 
tithetical phases, and in each case this unity is brought about by 
the intervention of three contracting parties, of whom one only 
sells, another only buys, while the third both buys and sells. 

What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit 
C— M— G from the circuit M— G— M, is the inverted order of 
succession of the two phases. The simple circulation of commodities 
begins with a sale and ends with a purchase, while the circulation 
of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with a sale. 
In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodi- 
ties, in the other they are money. In the first form the movement 
is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by 
that of a commodity. 

In the circulation G — M — G, the money is in the end con- 
verted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is spent 
once for all. In the inverted form, M— G— M, on the contrary, 
the buyer lays out money in order that, as a seller, he may recover 
money. By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into 
circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same 
commodity. He lets the money go, but only with the sly inten- 
tion of getting it back again. The money, therefore, is not spent, 
it is merely advanced. 1 

In the circuit G — M — G, the same piece of money changes 
its place twice. The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it away 
to another seller. The complete circulation, which begins with 
the receipt, concludes with the payment, of money for commodi- 
ties. It is the very contrary in the circuit M — G — M. Here it is 
not the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the com- 
modity. The buyer takes it from the hands of the seller and passes 
it into the hands of another buyer. Just as in the simple circu- 
lation of commodities the double change of place of the same 
piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, 
so here the double change of place of the same commodity brings 
about the reflux of the money to its point of departure. 

Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold 
for more than was paid for it. This circumstance influences only 
the amount of the money that comes back. The reflux itself takes 



1 "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed 
is called money advanced; when it is bought not to be sold, it may be said 
to be expended." — (James Steuart: "Works," &amp;c. Edited by Gen. Sir James 
Steuart, his son. Lond., 1805, V. I., p. 274.) 



THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 149 

place, so soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other 
words, so soon as the circuit M— G— M is completed. We have 
here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of 
money as capital, and its circulation as mere money. 

The circuit G— M— G comes completely to an end, so soon 
as the money brought in by the sale of one commodity is abstract- 
ed again by the purchase of another. 

If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting- 
point, this can only happen through a renewal or repetition 
of the operation. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and with this 
£3 buy clothes, the money, so far as I am concerned, is spent 
and done with. It belongs to the clothes merchant. If I now sell 
a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not 
however as a sequel to the first transaction, but in consequence 
of its repetition. The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete 
this second transaction by a fresh purchase. Therefore, in the 
circuit C — M — G, the expenditure of money has nothing to do 
with its reflux. On the other hand, in M— G— M, the reflux of 
the money is conditioned by the very mode of its expenditure. 
Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is inter- 
rupted and incomplete, owing to the absence of its complementary 
and final phase, the sale. 

The circuit G— M— G starts with one commodity, and fin- 
ishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into consump- 
tion. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use- 
value, is its end and aim. The circuit M— G— M, on the contrary, 
commences with money and ends with money. Its leading mo- 
tive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange- 
value. 

In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of 
the circuit have the same economic form. They are both com- 
modities, and commodities of equal value. But they are also use- 
values differing in their qualities, as, for example, corn and 
clothes. The exchange of products, of the different materials in 
which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis 
of the movement. It is otherwise in the circulation M— C— M, 
which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. 
Both extremes have the same economic form. They are both money, 
and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values; for 
money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their 
particular use-values vanish. To exchange £100 for cotton, and 
then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a roundabout 
way of exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and 



150 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

appears to be an operation just as purposeless as it is absurd. l 
One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its 
amount. The character and tendency of the process M — G — M, 
is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its 
extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative 
difference. More money is withdrawn from circulation at the 
finish than was thrown into it at the start. The cotton that was 
bought for £100 is perhaps resold for £100+ £10 or £110. The 
exact form of this process is therefore M — C — M', where M' = 
M + AM =the original sum advanced, plus an increment. 
This increment or excess over the original value I call "surplus- 
value." The value originally advanced, therefore, not only re- 
mains intact while in circulation, but adds to itself a surplus- 
value or expands itself. It is this movement that converts it 
into capital. 

Of course, it is also possible, that in G — M — G, the two 
extremes C — C, say corn and clothes, may represent different 
quantities of value. The farmer may sell his corn above its value, 
or may buy the clothes at less than their value. He may, on the 
other hand, "be done" by the clothes merchant. Yet, in the form 
of circulation now under consideration, such differences in value 
are purely accidental. The fact that the corn and the clothes are 
equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it 



1 "On n'echange pas de I'argent contre de l'argent," says Mercier dc 
la Riviere to the Mercantilists (1. c, p. 486). In a work, which, ex professo, 
treats of "trade" and "speculation," occurs the following: "All trade consists 
in the exchange of things of different kinds; and the advantage" (to the mer- 
chant?) "arises out of this difference. To exchange a pound of bread against 
a pound of bread ... would be attended with no advantage; ... Hence trade 
is advantageously contrasted with gambling, which consists in a mere 
exchange of money for money." (Th. Corbet, "An Inquiry into the Causes 
and Modes of the Wealth of Individuals; or the Principles of Trade and Spec- 
ulation Explained." London, 1841, p. 5.) Although Corbet does not see that 
M — M, the exchange of money for money, is the characteristic form of cir- 
culation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he 
acknowledges that this form is common to gambling and to one species of 
trade, viz., speculation: but then comes MacCulloch and makes out, that to 
buy in order to sell, is to speculate, and thus the difference between Specu- 
lation and Trade vanishes. "Every transaction in which an individual buys 
produce in order to sell it again, is, in fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch: 
"A Dictionary Practical, &amp;c, of Commerce." Lond., 1847, p. 1009.) With 
much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, 
remarks, "Le commerce est un jeu: (taken from Locke) et ce n'est pas avec 
des gueux qu'on peut gagner. Si Ton gagnait longtemps en tout avec tous, 
il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour 
recommencer le jeu." (Pinto: "Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amster- 
dam, 1771, p. '231.) 



THE GENERAL FORM ULA FOR CAPITAL 151 

does in M— C— M. The equivalence of their values is rather a 
necessary condition to its normal course. 

The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to 
buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it aims at, namely, 
consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that 
lies altogether outside the sphere of circulation. But when we 
buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the 
same thing, money, exchange-value; and thereby the movement 
becomes interminable. No doubt, M becomes M+AM, £100 
become £110. But when viewed in their qualitative aspect alone, 
£110 are the same as £100, namely money; and considered quan- 
titatively, £110 is, like £100, a sum of definite and limited value. 
If now, the £110 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. 
They are no longer capital. Withdrawn from circulation, they 
become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that 
state till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. 
If, then, the expansion of value is once aimed at, there is just 
the same inducement to augment the value of the £110 as that of 
the £100; for both are but limited expressions for exchange-value, 
and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, by quan- 
titative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. Momen- 
tarily, indeed, the value originally advanced, the £100 is distin- 
guishable from the surplus-value of £10 that is annexed to it 
during circulation; but the distinction vanishes immediately. At 
the end of the process, we do not receive with one hand the origi- 
nal £100, and with the other, the surplus-value of £10. We simply 
get a value of £110, which is in exactly the same condition and 
fitness for commencing the expanding process, as the original 
£100 was. Money ends the movement only to begin it again. l 
Therefore, the final result of every separate circuit, in which a 
purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the 
starting-point of a new circuit. The simple circulation of com- 
modities — selling in order to buy — is a means of carrying out a 
purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropria- 
tion of use-values, the satisfaction of wants. The circulation of 
money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the ex- 
pansion of value takes place only within this constanly renewed 



1 "Capital is divisible ... into the original capital and the profit, the 
increment to the capital ... although in practice this profit is immediately 
turned into capital, and set in motion with the original." (F. Engels, 
"Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie, in: Deutsch-Franzosische 
Jahrbiicher, herausgegeben von Arnold Ruge und Karl Marx." Paris, 1844, 
p. 99.) 



152 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no lim- 
its. 1 

As the conscious representative of this movement, the pos- 
sessor of money becomes a capitalist. His person, or rather his 
pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which 
it returns. The expansion of value, which is the objective basis 
or main-spring of the circulation M — C — M, becomes his subjec- 
tive aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever 
more and more wealth in the abstract becomes the sole motive 
of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as 
capital personified and endowed with consciousness and a will. 
Use-values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim 
of the capitalist; 2 neither must the profit on any single transac- 
tion. The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone 



1 Aristotle opposes (Economic to Chrematistic. He starts from the for- 
mer. So far as it is the art of gaining a livelihood, it is limited to procuring 
those articles that are necessary to existence, and useful either to a household 
or the state. "True wealth (6 dXri&amp;tvoi; nkou'ot;) consists of such values in 
use; for the quantity of possessions of this kind, capable of making life pleas- 
ant, is not unlimited. There is, however, a second mode of acquiring things, 
to which we may by preference and with correctness give the name of Chre- 
matistic, and in this case there appear to be no limits to riches and posses- 
sions. Trade Ofl xaur^ay./) is literally retail trade, and Aristotle takes this 
kind because in it values in use predominate) does not in its nature belong 
to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to what is necessary 
to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, the 
original form of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there 
arose the necessity for money. On the discovery of money, barter of neces- 
sity developed into xotTirjUxT), into trading in commodities, and this again, 
in opposition to its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art 
of making money. Now Chrematistic is distinguishable from (Economic in 
this way, that "in the case of Chrematistic circulation is the source of riches 
(tioiiq-cixt) ypr)}iaT(ov... ha ypr,|i2Tcov S&lt;.a2oV?]&lt;;). And it appears to revolve about 
money, for money is the beginning and end of this kind of exchange (to 
vap vojjLtCTjxat oTot/elov xai rapci; t9j&lt;; dMarprj&lt;; ka~(v). Therefore also riches, such as 
Chrematistic strives for, are unlimited. Just as every art that is not a means 
to an end, but an end in itself, has no limit to its aims, because it seeks con- 
stantly to approach nearer and nearer to that end, while those arts that pur- 
sue means to an end, are not boundless, since the goal itself imposes a limit 
upon them, so with Chrematistic, there are no bounds to its aims, these aims 
being absolute wealth. (Economic not Chrematistic has a limit... the object 
of the former is something different from money, of the latter the augmenta- 
tion of money.... By confounding these two forms, which overlap each other, 
some people have been led to look upon the preservation and increase of 
money ad infinitum as the end and aim of (Economic." (Aristoteles, "De Rep." 
edit. Bekker. lib. I. c. 8, 9. passim.) 

2 "Commodities (here used in the sense of use-values) are not the ter- 
minating object of the trading capitalist, money is his terminating object." 
(Th. Chalmers, "On Pol. Econ^ &amp;c.,"2nd Ed., Glasgow, 1832, pp. 165, 166.) 



THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 153 

is what he aims at. 1 This boundless greed after riches, this pas- 
sionate chase after exchange-value, 2 is common to the capitalist 
and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, 
the capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation 
of exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking 
to save 3 his money from circulation, is attained by the more 
acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circula- 
tion. 4 

The independent form, i.e., the money-form, which the 
value of commodities assumes in the case of simple circulation, 
serves only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes 
in the final result of the movement. On the other hand, in the 
circulation M— C— M, both the money and the commodity rep- 
resent only different modes of existence of value itself, the money 
its general mode, and the commodity its particular, or, so to say, 
disguised mode. 5 It is constantly changing from one form to the 
other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an auto- 
matically active character. If now we take in turn each of the 
two different forms which self-expanding value successively 
assumes in the course of its life, we then arrive at these two prop- 
ositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities. 6 In truth, 
however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, 
while constantly assuming the form in turn of money and com- 
modities, it at the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates 



1 "II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre 
al futuro." (A. Genovesi, Lezioni di Economia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, 
of Italian Economists. Parte Moderna t. viii. p. 139.) 

2 "The inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will 
always lead capitalists." (MacCulloch: "The Principles of Polit. Econ." 
London, 1830, p. 179.) This view, of course, does not prevent the same Mac- 
Culloch and others of his kidney, when in theoretical difficulties, such, for 
example, as the question of over-production, from transforming the same 
capitalist into a moral citizen, whose sole concern is for use-values, 
and who even develops an insatiable hunger for boots, hats, eggs, calico, 
and other extremely familiar sorts of use-values. 

3 Sooqsiv is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. So in Eng- 
lish to save has the same two meanings: sauver and epargner. 

4 "Questo infinito che le cose non hanno in progresso, hanno in giro." 
(Galiani.) 

8 "Ce n'est pas la matiere qui fait le capital, mais la valeur de ces ma- 
lieres." (J. B. Say: "Traite d'Econ. Polit." 3eme ed. Paris, 1817, t. II., 
p. 429.) 

6 "Currency (!) employed in producing articles ... is capital." (Mac- 
leod: "The Theory and Practice of Banking." London, 1855, v. 1, ch. i. 
p. 55.) "Capital is commodities." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. Econ." Lond., 
1821, p. 74.) 



154 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

itself by throwing of! surplus-value from itself; the original value, 
in other words, expands spontaneously. For the movement, in 
the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, 
its expansion, therefore, is automatic expansion. Because it is 
value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add 
value to itself. It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, 
lays golden eggs. 

Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, 
and assuming at one time the form of money, at another that 
of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself 
and expanding, it requires some independent form, by means of 
which its identity may at any time be established. And this 
form it possesses only in the shape of money. It is under the 
form of money that value begins and ends, and begins again, 
every act of its own spontaneous generation. It began by being 
£100, it is now £110, and so on. But the money itself is only one 
of the two forms of value. Unless it takes the form of some com- 
modity, it does not become capital. There is here no antagonism, as 
in the case of hoarding, between the money and commodities. The 
capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may 
look, or however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth 
money, inwardly circumcised Jews, and what is more, a wonder- 
ful means whereby out of money to make more money. 

In simple circulation, C — M — C, the value of commodities 
attained at the most a form independent of their use-values, i.e., 
the form of money; but that same value now in the circulation 
M— C— M, or the circulation of capital, suddenly presents itself 
as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own, 
passing through a life-process of its own, in which money and 
commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in 
turn. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations 
of commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations 
with itself. It differentiates itself as original value from itself 
as surplus-value; as the father differentiates himself from himself 
qua the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the surplus- 
value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capita i, 
and so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the 
son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their difference vanish, 
and they again become one, £110. 

Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in 
process, and, as such, capital. It comes out of circulation, enters 
into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, 
comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same 



THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 155 

round ever afresh. 1 M — M', money which begets money, such is 
the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, 
the Mercantilists. 

Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order 
to sell dearer, M — C — M', appears certainly to be a form peculiar 
to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. But 
industrial capital too is money, that is changed into commodi- 
ties, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into 
more money. The events that take place outside the sphere of 
circulation, in the interval between the buying and selling, do 
not affect the form of this movement. Lastly, in the case of in- 
terest-bearing capital, the circulation M — C — M' appears abridged. 
We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the form 
M— M', "en style lapidaire" so to say, money that is worth more 
money, value that is greater than itself. 

M — C — M' is therefore in reality the general formula of cap- 
ital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation. 



1 Capital: "portion fructifiante de la richesse accumulee ... valeur per- 
manente, multipliante." (Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit.," 
t. i., p. 88, 89.) 



156 



CHAPTER V 

CONTRADICTIONS 

IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL 

The form which circulation takes when money becomes capi- 
tal, is opposed to all the laws we have hitherto investigated 
bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even 
of circulation itself. What distinguishes this form from that of 
the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted order of 
succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. 
How can this purely formal distinction between these processes 
change their character as it were by magic? 

But that is not all. This inversion has no existence for two 
out of the three persons who transact business together. As cap- 
italist, I buy commodities from A and sell them again to B, 
but as a simple owner of commodities, I sell them to B and then 
purchase fresh ones from A. A and B see no difference between 
the two sets of transactions. They are merely buyers or sellers. 
And I on each occasion meet them as a mere owner of either 
money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what is more, 
in both sets of transactions, I am opposed to A only as a buyer 
and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the other 
only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a 
capitalist, or as representative of anything that is more than 
money or commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what 
money and commodities can. For me the purchase from A and 
the sale to B are part of a series. But the connexion between the 
two acts exists for me alone. A does not trouble himself about 
my transaction with B, nor does B about my business with A. 
And if I offered to explain to them the meritorious nature of my 
action in inverting the order of succession, they would probably 
point out to me that I was mistaken as to that order of succession, 
and that the whole transaction, instead of beginning with a 
purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the contrary, with 



CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 157 

a sale and was concluded with a purchase. In truth, my first act, 
the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my 
second act, the sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase. 
Not content with that, A and B would declare that the whole 
series was superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for 
the future A would buy direct from B, and B sell direct to A. 
Thus the whole transaction would be reduced to a single act form- 
ing an isolated, non-complemented phase in the ordinary cir- 
culation of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view, and 
from B's, a mere purchase. The inversion, therefore, of the order 
of succession, does not take us outside the sphere of the simple 
circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether 
there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an ex- 
pansion of the value that enters into circulation, and, consequent- 
ly, a creation of surplus-value. 

Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which 
it presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities. 
This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy 
from each other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually 
owing are equal and cancel each other. The money in tKis case 
is money of account and serves to express the value of the com- 
modities by their prices, but is not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, 
confronted with them. So far as regards use-values, it is clear 
that both parties may gain some advantage. Both part with goods 
that, as use-values, are of no service to them, and receive others 
that they can make use of. And there may also be a further gain. 
A, who sells wine and buys corn, possibly produces more wine, 
with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B, on the other 
hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. A, therefore, may 
get, for the same exchange-value, more corn, and B more wine, 
than each would respectively get without any exchange by pro- 
ducing his own corn and wine. With reference, therefore, to use- 
value, there is good ground for saying that "exchange is a trans- 
action by which both sides gain." 1 It is otherwise with exchange- 
value. "A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with 
a man who has plenty of corn and no wine; an exchange takes 
place between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same 
value. This act produces no increase of exchange-value either 
for the one or the other; for each of them already possessed, before 



1 "L'echange est une transaction admirable dans laquelle les deux 
contractants gagnent— toujours (!)" (Destutt de Tracy: "Traite de la Vo- 
lonte et de ses effets." Paris, 1826, p. 68.) This work appeared afterwards- 
as "Traite d'Econ. Polit." 



158 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means 
of that operation." 1 The result is not altered by introducing 
money, as a medium of circulation, between the commodities, 
and making the sale and the purchase two distinct acts. 2 The 
value of a commodity is expressed in its price before it goes into 
circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, 
not its result. 3 

Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances 
not immediately flowing from the laws of the simple circulation 
of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except 
the replacing of one use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, 
a mere change in the form of the commodity. The same exchange- 
value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social labour, re- 
mains throughout in the hands of the owner of the commodity, 
first in the shape of his own commodity, then in the form of the 
money for which he exchanged it, and lastly, in the shape of the 
commodity he buys with that money. This change of form does 
not imply a change in the magnitude of the value. But the change, 
which the value of the commodity undergoes in this process, is 
limited to a change in its money-form. This form exists first as 
the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual 
sum of money, which, however, was already expressed in the 
price, and lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. This 
change of form no more implies, taken alone, a change in the 
quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into sover- 
eigns, half sovereigns and shillings. So far therefore as the cir- 
culation of commodities effects a change in the form alone of 
their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be 
the exchange of equivalents. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows 
about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to consider the 
phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply 
and demand are equal, which amounts to this, that their effect 
is nil. If therefore, as regards the use-values exchanged, both 
buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the 
case as regards the exchange-values. Here we must rather say, 
"Where equality exists there can be no gain." 4 It is true, commod- 

1 "Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 544. 

2 "Que Tune de ces deux valeurs soit argent, ou qu'elles soient toutes 
deux marchandises usuelles, rien de plus indifferent en soi." ("Mercier de la 
Riviere," 1. c, p. 543.) 

8 "Ce ne sont pas les contractants qui prononcent sur la valeur; elle 
est decidee avant la convention." (Le Trosne, p. 906.) 

4 "Dove e egualita non e lucro." (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, 
Parte Moderna," t. iv., p. 244.) 



CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 159 

ities may be sold at prices deviating from their values, but these 
deviations are to be considered as infractions of the laws of the 
exchange of commodities, J which in its normal state is an exchange 
of equivalents, consequently, no method for increasing value. 2 
Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent th&amp; 
circulation of commodities as a source of surplus-value, there 
lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. 
For instance, Condillac says: "It is not true that on an exchange 
of commodities we give value for value. On the contrary, each 
of the two contracting parties in every case, gives a less for a 
greater value. ... If we really exchanged equal values, neither 
party could make a profit. And yet, they both gain, or ought to 
gain. Why? The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to 
our wants. What is more to the one is less to the other, and vice 
versa. ... It is not to be assumed that we offer for sale articles 
required for our own consumption. ... We wish to part with a 
useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give 
less for more. ... It was natural to think that, in an exchange, 
value was given for value, whenever each of the articles exchanged 
was of equal value with the same quantity of gold. ... But there 
is another point to be considered in our calculation. The question 
is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for something 
necessary." 3 We see in this passage, how Condillac not only 
confuses use-value with exchange-value, but in a really childish 
manner assumes, that in a society, in which the production of 
commodities is well developed, each producer produces his own 
means of subsistence, and throws into* circulation only the excess 
over his own requirements. 4 Still, Condillac's argument is 

1 "L'Schange devient desavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quel- 
que chose etrangere vient diminuer ou exagerer le prix; alors l'egalite est 
blessee, mais la lesion procede de cette cause et non de l'echange." (Le 
Trosne, 1. c, p. 904.) 

2 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalite qui se iait de valeur 
pour valeur egale. II n'est done pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton 
donne autant que Ton recoit." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 903.) 

8 Condillac: "Le Commerce et le Gouvernement" (1776). Edit. Daire 
et Molinari in the "Melanges d'Econ. Polit." Paris, 1847, pp. 267, 291. 

4 Le Trosne, therefore, answers his friend Condillac with justice as 
follows: "Dans une ... societe formee il n'y a pas de surabondant en aucun 
genre." At the same time, in a bantering way, he remarks: "If both the per- 
sons who exchange receive more to an equal amount, and part with less to 
an equal amount, they both get the same." It is because Condillac has not 
the remotest idea of the nature of exchange-value that he has been chosen 
by Herr Professor Wilhelm Roscher as a proper person to answer for the sound- 
ness of his own childish notions. See Roscher's "Die Grundlagen der Natio- 
nalokonomie, Dritte Auflage," 1858. 



160 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

frequently used by modern economists, more especially when the 
point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in its developed 
form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value. For instance, 
"Commerce ... adds value to products, for the same products 
in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of 
producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of produc- 
tion." 1 But commodities are not paid for twice over, once on 
account of their use-value, and again on account of their value. 
And though the use-value of a commodity is more serviceable 
to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more serviceable 
to the seller. Would he otherwise sell it? We might therefore 
just as well say that the buyer performs "strictly an act of 
production/' by converting stockings, for example, into money. 

If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- 
value, and consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain 
that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, 
circulation. There is no creation of surplus-value. And, in its 
normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange 
of equivalents. But in actual practice, the process does not retain 
its normal form. Let us, therefore, assume an exchange of non- 
equivalents. 

In any case the market for commodities is only frequented 
by owners of commodities, and the power which these persons 
exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their com- 
modities. The material variety of these commodities is the ma- 
terial incentive to the act of exchange, and makes buyers and 
sellers mutually dependent, because none of them possesses the 
object of his own wants, and each holds in his hand the object 
of another's wants. Besides these material differences of their 
use-values, there is only one other difference between commodi- 
ties, namely, that between their bodily form and the form into 
which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodi- 
ties and money. And consequently the owners of commodities are 
distinguishable only as sellers, those who own commodities, and 
buyers, those who own money. 

Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller 
is enabled to sell his commodities above their value, what is 
worth 100 for 110, in which case the price is nominally raised 
10%. The seller therefore pockets a surplus-value of 10. But 
after he has sold he becomes a buyer. A third owner of commodi- 



1 S. P. Newman: "Elements of Polit. Econ." Andover and New York, 
lfc35, p. 175. 



CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 161 

ties comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys 
the privilege of selling his commodities 10% too dear. Our friend 
gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer. l The net 
result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one 
another at 10% above their value, which comes precisely to the 
same as if they sold them at their true value. Such a general and 
nominal rise of prices has the same effect as if the values had 
been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of gold. 
The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real re- 
lation between their values would remain unchanged. 

Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has 
the privilege of purchasing commodities under their value. In 
this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his 
turn will become a seller. He was so before he became buyer; 
he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 10% as buyer. 2 
Everything is just as it was. 

The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion 
of money into capital, can consequently be explained neither 
on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, 
nor that they are bought below their value. 3 

The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrele- 
vant matters after the manner of Col. Torrens:" Effectual demand 
consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, 
to give for commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, 
some greater portion of ... capital than their production costs." 4 
In relation to circulation, producers and consumers meet only 
as buyers and sellers. To assert that the surplus-value acquired 
by the producer has its origin in the fact that consumers pay 
for commodities more than their value, is only to say in other 
words: The owner of commodities possesses, as a seller, the 



1 "By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce ... sellers 
not enriched ... since what they gain as sellers, they precisely expend io the 
quality of buyers." ("The Essential Principles of the Wealth of Nations, 
&amp;c, London, 1797, p. 66.) r , 

2 Si Ton est force de donner pour 18 livres une quantite de telle produc- 
tion qui en valait 24, lorsqu'on employera ce meme argent a acheter, on aura 
egalement pour 18 1. ce que Ton payait 24." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 897.) 

3 "Chaque vendeur ne peut done parvenir a rencherir habituellement 
ses marchandises, qu'en se soumettant aussi a payer habituellement plus 
cher les marchandises des autres vendeurs; et par la meme raison, chaque 
consommateur ne peut payer habituellement moins cher ce qu'il achete, 
qu'en se soumettant aussi a une diminution semblable sur le prix des choses 
qu'il vend." (Merrier de la Riviere, 1. c, p. 555.) 

4 R. Torrens. "An Essay on the Production of Wealth.' London, 1SZ1, 
p. 349. 



162 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

privilege of selling too dear. The seller has himself produced the 
commodities or represents their producer, but the buyer has to 
no less extent produced the commodities represented by his 
money, or represents their producer. The distinction between 
them is, that one buys and the other sells. The fact that the owner 
of the commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them 
over their value, and under the designation of consumer, pays 
too much for them, does not carry us a single step further. l 

To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that 
surplus-value has its origin in a nominal rise of prices or in the 
privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume 
the existence of a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e., 
only consumes and does not produce. The existence of such a 
class is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, 
viz., that of simple circulation. But let us anticipate. The money 
with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must 
constantly flow into their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, 
by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners 
themselves. To sell commodities above their value to such a class, 
is only to crib back again a part of the money previously given 
to it. 2 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute 
to ancient Rome. With this money Rome purchased from them 
commodities, and purchased them too dear. The provincials 
cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, 
in the course of trade, a portion of the tribute. Yet, for all that, 
the conquered were the really cheated. Their goods were still 
paid for with their own money. That is not the way to get rich 
or to create surplus- value. 

Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where 
sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers. Our difficulty may 
perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications 
instead of as individuals. 

A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or G 
without their being able to retaliate. A sells wine worth £40 to B, 



1 "The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very 
absurd. Who are the consumers?" (G. Ramsay: "An Essay on the Distribu- 
tion of Wealth." Edinburgh, 1836, p. 183.) 

2 "When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend 
him to pay some other person to take off his goods?" is a question put by an 
angry disciple of Ricardo to Malthus, who, like his disciple, Parson Chal- 
mers, economically glorifies this class of simple buyers or consumers. (See 
"An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand and the 
Necessity of Consumption, lately advocated by Mr. Malthus," &amp;c Lond., 
1821, p. 55.) 



CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 163 

and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of £50. A 
has converted his £40 into £50, has made more money out of 
less, and has converted his commodities into capital. Let us exam- 
ine this a little more closely. Before the exchange we had £40 
worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50 worth of corn in those 
of B, a total value of £90. After the exchange we have still the 
same total value of £90. The value in circulation has not increased 
by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A and B. 
What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is "minus" 
to one is "plus" to the other. The same change would have taken 
place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly 
stolen the £10 from B. The sum of the values in circulation can 
clearly not be augmented by any change in their distribution, any 
more than the quantity of the precious metals in a country by a 
Jew selling a Queen Anne's farthing for a guinea. The capitalist 
class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach themselves. * 

Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. 
If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if 
non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus- value. 2 Circula- 
tion, or the exchange of commodities, begets no value. 3 

The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the stand- 
ard form of capital, the form under which it determines the eco- 
nomic organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of 
consideration its most popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, 
merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital. 

The circuit M— C— M', buying in order to sell dearer, is seen 
most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. But the movement 

1 Destutt de Tracy, although, or perhaps because, he was a member 
of the Institute, held the opposite view. He says, industrial capitalists 
make profits because "they all sell for more than it has cost to produce. 
And to whom do they sell? In the first instance to one another." (1. c, 
p. 239.) 

2 "L'echange qui se fait de deux valeurs egales n'augmente ni ne dimi- 
nue la masse des valeurs subsistantes dans la societe. L'echange de deux 
valeurs inegales ... ne change rien non plus a la somme des valeurs sociales, 
bien qu'il ajoute a la fortune de Tun ce qu'il ote de la fortune de 1'autre." 
(J. B. Say, 1. c, t. II, pp. 443, 444.) Say, not in the least troubled as to the 
consequences of this statement, borrows it, almost word for word, from the 
Physiocrats. The following example will show how Monsieur Say turned to 
account the writings of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotten, for the 
purpose of expanding the "value" of his own. His most celebrated saying, 
"On n'achete des produits qu'avec des produits" (1. c, t. II, p. 441) runs 
as follows in the original physiocratic work: "Les productions ne se paient 
qu'avec des productions." (Le Trosne, I. c, p. 899.) 

3 "Exchange confers no value at all upon products." (F. Wayland: 
"The Elements of Political Economy." Boston, 1843, p. 169.) 



164 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. Since, 
however, it is impossible, by circulation alone, to account for 
the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of sur- 
plus-value, it would appear, that merchants' capital is an impos- 
sibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; 1 that, therefore, 
it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage gained, over 
both the selling and the buying producers, by the merchant who 
parasitically shoves himself in between them. It is in this sense 
that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheat- 
ing." 2 If the transformation of merchants' money into cap- 
ital is to be explained otherwise than by the producers being 
simply cheated, a long series of intermediate steps would be 
necessary, which, at present, when the simple circulation of 
commodities forms our only assumption, are entirely want- 
ing. 

What we have said with reference to merchants' capital 
applies still more to money-lenders' capital. In merchants' 
capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the 
market, and the augmented money that is withdrawn from the 
market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in other 
words by the movement of the circulation. In money-lenders' 
capital the form M — C — M' is reduced to the two extremes with- 
out a mean, M — M', money exchanged for more money, a form 
that is incompatible with the nature of money, and therefore 
remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of 
commodities. Hence Aristotle: "since chrematistic is a double 
science, one part belonging to commerce, the other to economic, 
the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, the former based 
on circulation and with justice disapproved (for it is not based on 
Nature, but on mutual cheating), therefore the usurer is most 
rightly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and 
is not used for the purposes for which it was invented. For it origi- 
nated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out 
of money, more money. Hence its name (toxo; interest and off- 
spring). For the begotten are like those who beget them. But 



1 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impos- 
sible. (G. Opdyke: "A Treatise on Polit. Economy." New York, 1851, pp. 66- 
69.) "The difference between real value and exchange-value is based upon 
this fact, namely, that the value of a thing is different from the so-called 
equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent." 
(F. Engels, 1. c, p. 96.) 

2 Benjamin Franklin: Works, Vol. II. edit. Sparks in "Positions to be 
examined concerning National Wealth," p. 376. 



CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 165 

interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a liv- 
ing, this is the most contrary to Nature." 1 

In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both 
merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital are derivative 
forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these two 
forms appear in the course of history before the modern standard 
form of capital. 

We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by cir- 
culation, and, therefore, that in its formation, something must 
take place in the background, which is not apparent in 
the circulation itself. 2 But can surplus-value possibly originate 
anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all 
the mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are 
determined by their commodities? Apart from circulation, the 
commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity. 
So far as regards value, that relation is limited to this, that the 
commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity 
being measured by a definite social standard. This quantity is 
expressed by the value of the commodity, and since the value 
is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed 
by the price, which we will suppose to be £10. But his labour 
is not represented both by the value of the commodity, and by 
a surplus over that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price 
of 11, not by a value that is greater than itself. The commodity 
owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding 
value. He can increase the value of his commodity, by adding 
fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in hand, by 
making, for instance, leather into boots. The same material has 
now more value, because it contains a greater quantity of labour. 
The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the 
value of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded it- 
self, has not, during the making of the boots, annexed surplus- 
value. It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circu- 
lation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into con- 
tact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and conse- 
quently convert money or commodities into capital. 

It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by cir- 
culation, and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart 



1 Aristotle, 1. c, c. 10. 

8 "Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by ex- 
changing. Had it not existed before, neither could it after that transaction." 
(Ramsay, 1. c, p. 184.) 



166 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

from circulation. It must have its origin both in circulation and 
yet not in circulation. 

We have, therefore, got a double result. 

The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on 
the basis of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities r 
in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equiva- 
lents. 1 Our friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo cap- 
italist, must buy his commodities at their value, must sell them 
at their value, and yet at the end of the process must withdraw 
more value from circulation than he threw into it at starting. 
His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place, 
both within the sphere of circulation and without it. These are 
the conditions of the problem. Hie Rhodus, hie salta! 



1 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this state- 
ment only means that the formation of capital must be possible even though 
the price and value of a commodity be the same; for its formation cannot 
be attributed to any deviation of the one from the other. If prices actually 
differ from values, we must, first of all, reduce the former to the latter, in 
other words, treat the difference as accidental in order that the phenomena 
may be observed in their purity, and our observations not interfered with 
by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process in ques- 
tion. We know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. 
The continual oscillations in prices, their rising and falling, compensate 
each other, and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their hidden 
regulator. It forms the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer 
in every undertaking that requires time. He knows that when a long period 
of time is taken, commodities are sold neither over nor under, but at their 
average price. If therefore he thought about the matter at all, he would for- 
mulate the problem of the formation of capital as follows: How can we account 
for the origin of capital on the supposition that prices are regulated by the 
average price, i.e., ultimately by the value of the commodities? I say "ul- 
timately," because average prices do not directly coincide with the values 
of commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe. 



167 



CHAPTER VI 

THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 

THe change of value that occurs in the case of money intended 
to be converted into capital, cannot take place in the money 
itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, 
it does no more than realise the price of the commodity it buys 
or pays for; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, never varying. 1 
Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the 
re-sale of the commodity, which does no more than transform the 
article from its bodily form back again into its money-form. 
The change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought 
by the first act, M— C, but not in its value, for equivalents are 
exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value. We 
are, therefore, forced to the conclusion that the change originates 
in the use-value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in its consump- 
tion. In order to be able to extract value from the consumption 
of a commodity, our friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as to 
find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity, 
whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source 
of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an em- 
bodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. The 
possessor of money does find on the market such a special com- 
modity in capacity for labour or labour-power. 

By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood 
the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities existing 
in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a 
use-value of any description. 

But in order that our owner of money may be able to find 
labour-power offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions 



1 "In the form of money ... capital is productive of no profit." (Ricar- 
do: "Princ. of Pol. Econ.," p. 267.) 



168 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



must first be fulfilled. The exchange of commodities of itself 
implies no other relations of dependence than those which result 
from its own nature. On this assumption, labour-power can appear 
upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so far as, its pos- 
sessor, the individual whose labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or 
sells it, as a commodity. In order that he may be able to do this, 
he must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner 
of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his person. l He and the owner 
of money meet in the market, and deal with each other as on the 
basis of equal rights, with this difference alone, that one is buyer, 
the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the eyes of the law. 
The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of the 
labour-power should sell it only for a definite period, for if he 
were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling 
himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from 
an owner of a commodity into a commodity. He must constantly 
look upon his labour-power as his own property, his own com- 
modity, and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the 
buyer temporarily, for a definite period of time. By this means 
alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. 2 
The second essential condition to the owner of money finding 
labour-power in the market as a commodity is this— that the 
labourer instead of being in the position to sell commodities in 



1 In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as 
this — that in the ancient world capital was fully developed, "except that 
the free labourer and a system of credit was wanting." Mommsen also, in his 
"History of Rome," commits, in this respect, one blunder after another. 

3 Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour- 
contracts. Wherever free labour is the rule, the laws regulate the mode of 
terminating this contract. In some States, particularly in Mexico (before the 
American Civil War, also in the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as 
a matter of fact, in the Danubian provinces till the revolution effected by 
Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of peonage. By means of advances, 
repayable in labour, which are handed down from generation to generation, 
not only the individual labourer, but his family, become, de facto, the prop- 
erty of other persons and their families. Juarez abolished peonage. The so- 
called Emperor Maximilian re-established it by a decree, which, in the House 
of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for the 
re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. "I may make over to another the use, 
for a limited time, of my particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabil- 
ities; because, in consequence of this restriction, they are impressed with a 
character of alienation with regard to me as a whole. But by the alienation 
of all my labour-time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the 
substance itself, in other words, my general activity and reality, my person, 
into the property of another." (Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 
1840, p. 104, § 67.) 



THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 169 

which his labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale 
as a commodity that very labour-power, which exists only in 
his living self. 

In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other 
than labour-power, he must of course have the means of produc- 
tion, as raw material, implements, &amp;c. No boots can be made 
without leather. He requires also the means of subsistence. No- 
body — not even "a musician of the future" — can live upon 
future products, or upon use-values in an unfinished state; and 
ever since the first moment of his appearance on the world's stage, 
man always has been, and must still be a consumer, both before 
and while he is producing. In a society where all products assume 
the form of commodities, these commodities must be sold after 
they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they can 
serve in satisfying the requirements of their producer. The time 
necessary for their sale is superadded to that necessary for their 
production. 

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the 
owner of money must meet in the market with the free labourer, 
free in the double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his 
labour-power as his own commodity, and that on the other hand 
he has no other commodity for sale, is short of everything neces- 
sary for the realisation of his labour-power. 

The question why this free labourer confronts him in the 
market, has no interest for the owner of money, who regards the 
labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities. 
And for the present it interests us just as little. We cling to the 
fact theoretically, as he does practically. One thing, however, 
is clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of 
money or commodities, and on the other men possessing nothing 
but their own labour-power. This relation has no natural basis, 
neither is its social basis one that is common to all historical 
periods. It is clearly the result of a past historical development, 
the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a 
whole series of older forms of social production. 

So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, 
bear the stamp of history. Definite historical conditions are nee 
essary that a product may become a commodity. It must not 
be produced as the immediate means of subsistence of the pro- 
ducer himself. Had we gone further, and inquired under what cir- 
cumstances all, or even the majority of products take the form of 
commodities, we should have found that this can only happen 
with production of a very specific kind, capitalist production. 



170 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Such an inquiry, however, would have been foreign to the analy- 
sis of commodities. Production and circulation of commodities 
can take place, although the great mass of the objects produced 
are intended for the immediate requirements of their producers, 
are not turned into commodities, and consequently social produc- 
tion is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth 
by exchange-value. The appearance of products as commodities 
pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour, 
that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation 
which first begins with barter, must already have been completed. 
But such a degree of development is common to many forms of 
society, which in other respects present the most varying histori- 
cal features. On the other hand, if we consider money, its existence 
implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities. The 
particular functions of money which it performs, either as the 
mere equivalent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or 
means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, accord- 
ing to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function or 
the other, to very different stages in the process of social produc- 
tion. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodi- 
ties relatively primitive, suffices for the production of all these 
forms. Otherwise with capital. The historical conditions of its 
existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of 
money and commodities. It can spring into life, only when the 
owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the 
market with the free labourer selling his labour-power. And this 
one historical condition comprises a world's history. Capital, 
therefore, announces from its first appearance a new epoch in 
the process of social production. 1 

We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, 
labour-power. Like all others it has a value. 2 How is that value- 
determined? 

The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of 
every other commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the 
production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this 



1 The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised by this, that labour 
power takes in the eyes of the labourer himself the form of a commodity which 
is his property; his labour consequently becomes wage-labour. On the other 
hand, it is only from this moment that the produce of labour universally 
becomes a commodity. 

2 "The value or worth of a man, is as of all other things his price — that 
is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power." (Th. Hobbes: 
"Leviathan" in Works, Ed Molesworth. Lond. 1839-44, v. iii, p. 76.) 



THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 171 

special article. So far as it has value, it represents no more than 
a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated 
in it. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the 
living individual. Its production consequently pre-supposes his 
existence. Given the individual, the production of labour-power 
consists in his reproduction of himself or his maintenance. For 
his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the means of sub- 
sistence. Therefore the labour-time requisite for the production 
of labour-power reduces itself to that necessary for the production 
of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of labour- 
power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the 
maintenance of the labourer. Labour-power, however, becomes a 
reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working. 
But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, 
&amp;c, is wasted, and these require to be restored. This increased 
expenditure demands a larger income. 1 If the owner of labour- 
power works to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat 
the same process in the same conditions as regards health and 
strength. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient 
to maintain him in his normal state as a labouring individual. 
His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary 
according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his 
country. On the other hand, the number and extent of his so-called 
necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are them- 
selves the product of historical development, and depend there- 
fore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a country, 
more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequent- 
ly on the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free 
labourers has been formed. 2 In contradistinction therefore to 
the case of other commodities, there enters into the determination 
of the value of labour-power a historical and moral element. 
Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average 
quantity of the means of subsistence necessary for the labourer 
is practically known. 

The owner of labour-power is mortal. If then his appearance 
in the market is to be continuous, and the continuous conversion 
of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power 
must perpetuate himself, "in the way that every living individual 



1 Hence the Roman Villieus, as overlooker of the agricultural slaves, 
received "more meagre fare than working slaves, because his work was 
lighter." (Th. Mommsen, Rom. Geschichte, 1856, p. 810.) 

2 Compare W. Th. Thornton: "Over-population and its Remedy,'* 
Lond., 1846. 



172 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



perpetuates himself, by procreation." 1 The labour-power with- 
drawn from the market by wear and tear and death, must be 
continually replaced by, at the very least, an equal amount of 
fresh labour-power. Hence the sum of the means of subsistence 
necessary for the production of labour-power must include the 
means necessary for the labourer's substitutes, i.e., his children, 
in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpet- 
uate its appearance in the market. 2 

In order to modify the human organism, so that it may ac- 
quire skill and handiness in a given branch of industry, and 
become labour-power of a special kind, a special education or 
training is requisite, and this, on its part, costs an equivalent 
in commodities of a greater or less amount. This amount varies 
according to the more or less complicated character of the 
labour-power. The expenses of this education (excessively small 
in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the 
total value spent in its production. 

The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a 
definite quantity of the means of subsistence. It therefore varies 
with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour 
requisite for their production. 

Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are 
consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be provided daily. 
Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and 
require to be replaced only at longer intervals. One article must 
be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly, 
and so on. But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays 
may be spread over the year, they must be covered by the average 
income, taking one day with another. If the total of the commodi- 
ties required daily for the production of labour-power = A, and 
those required weekly ==B, and those required quarterly = C, and 

so on, the daily average of these commodities =— — ' ^~ — i— m 

Suppose that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average 
day there are embodied 6 hours of social labour, then there is 
incorporated daily in labour-power half a day's average social 

1 Petty. 

2 "Its (labour's) natural price ... consists in such- a quantity of 
necessaries and comforts of life, as, from the nature of the climate, and 
the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to 
enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an un- 
diminished supply of labour." (R. Torrens: "An Essay on the External 
Corn Trade." Lond. 1815, p. 62.) The word labour is here wrongly used 
for labour-power. 



THE BUYING AND SELLING OP LABOUR-POWER 173 

labour, in other words, half a day's labour is requisite for the 
daily production of labour-power. This quantity of labour forms 
the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour-power 
daily reproduced. If half a day's average social labour is incor- 
porated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corre- 
sponding to the value of a day's labour-power. If its owner therefore 
offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its selling price is equal 
to its value, and according to our supposition, our friend Money- 
bags, who is intent upon converting his three shillings into capi- 
tal, pays this value. 

The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is deter- 
mined by the value of the commodities, without the daily supply 
of which the labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently 
by the value of those means of subsistence that are physically 
indispensable. If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum, 
it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be 
maintained and developed only in a crippled state. But the value 
of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite 
to turn it out so as to be of normal quality. 

It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this 
method of determining the value of labour-power, a method 
prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal method, 
and which wails with Rossi that, "To comprehend capacity for 
labour (puissance de travail) at the same time that we make 
abstraction from the means of subsistence of the labourers during 
the process of production, is to comprehend a phantom (etre de 
raison). When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we 
speak at the same time of the labourer and his means of subsist' 
ence, of labourer and wages." 1 When we speak of capacity for 
labour, we do not speak of labour, any more than when we speak 
of capacity for digestion, we speak of digestion. The latter process 
requires something more than a good stomach. When we speak 
of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary 
means of subsistence. On the contrary, their value is expressed 
in its value. If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer 
derives no benefit from it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel 
nature-imposed necessity that this capacity has cost for its pro- 
duction a definite amount of the means of subsistence and that 
it will continue to do so for its reproduction. He will then agree 
with Sismondi: "that capacity for labour ... is nothing unless it 
is sold." 2 

1 Rossi. "Cours d'Econ. Polit.," Bruxelles, 1842, p. 370. 

2 Sismondi; "Nouv. Princ. etc.," t. I, p. 112. 



174 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a 
commodity is, that its use-value does not, on the conclusion of 
the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass 
into the hands of the former. Its value, like that of every other 
commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circulation, since 
a definite quantity of social labour has been spent upon it; but 
its use-value consists in the subsequent exercise of its force. The 
alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the 
buyer, its employment as a use-value, are separated by an inter- 
val of time. But in those cases in which the formal alienation by 
sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not simultaneous with 
its actual delivery to the buyer, the money of the latter usually 
functions as means of payment. 1 In every country in which the 
capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to pay 
for labour-power before it has been exercised for the period fixed 
by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. In all 
cases, therefore, the use-value of the labour-power is advanced 
to the capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to consume it 
before he receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives 
credit to the capitalist. That this credit is no mere fiction, is 
shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy 
of the capitalist, 2 but also by a series of more enduring conse- 
quences. 3 Nevertheless, whether money serves as a means of 



1 "All labour is paid after it has ceased." ("An Inquiry into those Prin- 
ciples Respecting the Nature of Demand," &amp;c, p. 104.) "Le credit commer- 
cial a du commencer au moment ou l'ouvrier, premier artisan de la produc- 
tion, a pu, au moyen de ses economies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu' 
a la fin de la semaine, de la quinzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &amp;.c." (Ch. Ga- 
nilh: "Des Systemes d'Econ. Polit." 2eme edit. Paris, 1821, t. II, p 150.) 

2 "L'ouvrier prete son industrie," but adds Storch slyly: he "risks noth- 
ing" except "de perdre son salaire ... l'ouvrier ne transmet rien de materiel." 
(Storch: "Gours d'Econ. Polit." Petersbourg, 1815, t. II., p. 37.) 

8 One example. In London there are two sorts of bakers, the "full priced," 
who sell bread at its full value, and the "undersellers," who sell it under 
its value. The latter class comprises more than three-fourths of the total 
number of bakers, (p. xxxii in the Report of H. S. Tremenheere, commis 
sioner to examine into "the grievances complained of by the journeymen 
bakers," &amp;c, Lond. 1862.) The undersellers, almost without exception, 
sell bread adulterated with alum, soap, pearl ashes, chalk, Derbyshire stone- 
dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome ingredients. (See 
the above cited Blue book, as also the report of "the committee of 1855 on 
the adulteration of bread," and Dr. Hassall's "Adulterations Detected," 
2nd Ed. Lond. 1861.) Sir John Gordon stated before the committee of 1855, 
that "in consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two 
pounds of bread a day, does not now get one fourth part of nourishing matter, 
let alone the deleterious effects on his health." Tremenheere states (1. c, 
p. xlviii), as the reason, why a very large part of the working-class, although 



THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 175 

purchase or as .a means of payment, this makes no alteration in 
the nature of the exchange of commodities. The price of the la- 
bour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not realised 
till later, like the rent of a house. The labour-power is sold, al- 
though it is only paid for at a later period. It will, therefore, be 
useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the parties, 
to assume provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power, 
on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the price stip- 
ulated to be paid for it. 

We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the 
possessor of this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is determined. 
The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself 
only in the actual usufruct, in the consumption of the labour- 
power. The money-owner buys everything necessary for this 
purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at 
its full value. The consumption of labour-power is at one and 
the same time the production of commodities and of surplus-value. 
The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of 
every other commodity, outside the limits of the market or of 



well aware of this adulteration, nevertheless accept the alum, stone-dust, 
&amp;c, as part of their purchase: that it is for them "a matter of necessity to 
take from their baker or from the chandler's shop, such bread as they choose 
to supply." As they are not paid their wages before the end ot the week, 
they in their turn are unable "to pay for the bread consumed by their tami- 
lies during the week, before the end of the week," and Tremenheere adds on 
the evidence of witnesses, "it is notorious that bread composed of those mix- 
tures is made expressly for sale in this manner." In many English and 
still more Scotch agricultural districts, wages are paid fortnightly and 
even monthly; with such long intervals between the payments, the agri- 
cultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit... He must pay higher prices, 
and is in fact tied to the shop which gives him credit Thus at Horningham 
in Wilts for example, where the wages are monthly, the same flour that he 
could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone, ('bixtn 
Report" on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer ot the Privy Council, 
&amp;c 1864 " p 264.) "The block printers of Paisley and Kilmarnock entorced, 
bv a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment ot wages." ("Reports 
of the Injectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p 34.) As a further pretty 
result of the credit given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may reler to 
the method current in many English coal mines, where the labourer is not 
paid till the end of the month, and in the meantime, receives sums on account 
from the capitalist, often in goods for which the miner is obliged to pay 
more than the market price (Truck-system). "It is a common practice with 
the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to their workmen at 
the end of each intermediate week. The cash is given in the shop" {i.e., the 
Tommy shop which belongs to the master), "the men take it on one side and 
lay it out on the other." ("Children's Employment Commission, III. Report, 
Lond 1864, p. 38, n. 192.) 



176 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



the sphere of circulation. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and 
by the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a 
time of this noisy sphere, where everything takes place on the 
surface and in view of all men, and follow them both into the 
hidden abode of production, on whose threshold there stares us 
in the face "No admittance except on business." Here we shall 
see, not only how capital produces, but how capital is produced. 
We shall at last force the secret of profit making. 

This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries 
the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very 
Eden of the innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, 
Equality, Property and Bentham. Freedom, because both buyer and 
seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained only 
by their own free will. They contract as free agents, and the 
agreement they come to, is but the form in which they give legal 
expression to their common will. Equality, because each enters 
into relation with the other, as with a simple owner of commodi- 
ties, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. Property, 
because each disposes only of what is his own. And Bentham, 
because each looks only to himself. The only force that brings 
them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the 
selfishness, the gain and the private interests of each. Each looks 
to himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest, and 
just because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre- 
established harmony of things, or under the auspices of an all- 
shrewd providence, work together to their mutual advantage, 
for the common weal and in the interest of all. 

On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange 
of commodities, which furnishes the "Free-trader Vulgaris" with 
his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges 
a society based on capital and wages, we think we can perceive 
a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis persona?. He, who 
before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; 
the possessor of labour-power follows as his labourer. The one 
with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business; the 
other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing his own 
hide to market and has nothing to expect but — a hiding. 



177 



PART III 

THE PRODUCTION 
OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS- VALUE 



CHAPTER VII 
THE LABOUR-PROCESS 
AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING SURPLUS-VALUE 

SECTION 1.— THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION 
OF USE-VALUES 

The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour- 
power in use is labour itself. The purchaser of labour-power 
consumes it by setting the seller of it to work. By working, the 
latter becomes actually, what before he only was potentially, 
labour-power in action, a labourer. In order that his labour may 
re -appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it 
on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a want 
of some sort. Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to pro- 
duce, is a particular use-value, a specified article. The fact that 
the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on under the 
control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general 
character of that production. We shall, therefore, in the first 
place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the 
particular form it assumes under given social conditions. 

Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man 
and Nature participate, and in which man of his own accord 
starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between 
himself and Nature. He opposes himself to Nature as one of her 
own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, 
the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate Nature's 
productions in a form adapted to his own wants. By thus acting 
on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes 
his own nature. He develops his slumbering powers and compels 
them to act in obedience to his sway, We are not now dealing 



178 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind 
us of the mere animal. An immeasurable interval of time sepa- 
rates the state of things in which a man brings his labour-power 
to market for sale as a commodity, from that state in which hu- 
man labour was still in its first instinctive stage. We pre-suppose 
labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. A spider 
conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee 
puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells. 
But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees 
is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination be- 
fore he erects it in reality. At the end of every labour-process, 
we get a result that already existed in the imagination of the la- 
bourer at its commencement. He not only effects a change of form in 
the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose 
of his own that gives the law to his modus operandi, and to which 
he must subordinate his will. And this subordination is no mere 
momentary act. Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the 
process demands that, during the whole operation, the workman's 
will be steadily in consonance with his purpose. This means close 
attention. The less he is attracted by the nature of the work, and 
the mode in which it is carried on, and the less, therefore, he 
enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily and men- 
tal powers, the more close his attention is forced to be. 

The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the per- 
sonal activity of man, i.e., work itself, 2, the subject of that 
work, and 3, its instruments. 

The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in 
the virgin state in which it supplies 1 man with necessaries or 
the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently 
of him, and is the universal subject of human labour. All those 
things which labour merely separates from immediate connexion 
with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously pro- 
vided by Nature. Such are fish which we catch and take from their 
element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and 
ores which we extract from their veins. If, on the other hand, 
the subject of labour has, so to say, been filtered through previous 
labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and 
ready for washing. All raw material is the subject of labour, but 



1 "The earth's spontaneous productions being in small quantity, and 
quite independent of man, appear, as it were, to be furnished by Nature, in 
the same way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to put him 
in a way of industry, and of making his fortune." (James Steuart: "Principles 
of Polit. Econ." edit. Dublin, 1770, v. I, p. 116.) 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 179 



not every subject of labour is raw material: it can only become so, 
after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour. 

An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, 
which the labourer interposes between himself and the subject 
of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. 
He makes use of the mechanical, physical, and chemical prop- 
erties of some substances in order to make other substances 
subservient to his aims. * Leaving out of consideration such 
ready-made means of subsistence as fruits, in gathering which 
a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the 
first thing of which the labourer possesses himself is not the sub- 
ject of labour but its instrument. Thus Nature becomes one of 
the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily 
organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible. As the 
earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. 
It supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, 
pressing, cutting, &amp;c. The earth itself is an instrument of labour, 
but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of 
other instruments and a comparatively high development of la- 
bour. 2 No sooner does labour undergo the least development, 
than it requires specially prepared instruments. Thus in the old- 
est caves we find stone implements and weapons. In the earliest 
period of human history domesticated animals, i.e., animals 
which have been bred for the purpose, and have undergone modi- 
fications by means of labour, play the chief part as instruments 
of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood, bones, 
and shells. 3 The use and fabrication of instruments of labour, al- 
though existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is 
specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Frank- 
lin therefore defines man as a tool-making animal. Relics of by- 
gone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the 
investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil 



1 "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Her cunning consists 
principally in her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and 
re-act on each other in accordance with their own nature, in this way, without 
any direct interference in the process, carries out reason's intentions." (He- 
gel: "Enzyklopadie, Erster Theil, Die Logik," Berlin, 1840, p 382.) 

2 In his otherwise miserable work ("Theorie de l'Econ. Polit." Paris, 
1815), Ganilh enumerates in a striking manner in opposition to the "Physio- 
crats" the long series of previous processes necessary before agriculture 
properly so called can commence. 

3 Turgot in his "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des 
Richesses" (1766) brings well into prominence the importance of domesti- 
cated animals to early civilisation. 



180 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

bones for the determination of extinct species of animals. It is 
not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instru- 
ments, that enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. * 
Instruments of labour not only supply a standard of the degree 
of development to which human labour has attained, but they are 
also indicators of the social conditions under which that labour is 
carried on. Among the instruments of labour, those of a mechanical 
nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the bone and mus- 
cles of production, offer much more decided characteristics of 
a given epoch of production, than those which, like pipes, tubs, 
baskets, jars, &amp;c, serve only to hold the materials for labour, 
which latter class, we may in a general way, call the vascular 
system of production. The latter first begins to play an important 
part in the chemical industries. 

In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of 
labour, in addition to those things that are used for directly 
transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one 
way or another, serve as conductors of activity, all such objects 
as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. These do 
not enter directly into the process, but without them it is either 
impossible for it to take place at all, or possible only to a par- 
tial extent. Once more we find the earth to be a universal in- 
strument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer 
and a field of employment for his activity. Among instruments 
that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this 
class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so forth. 

In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help 
of the instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from 
the commencement, in the material worked upon. The process 
disappears in the product; the latter is a use-value, Nature's 
material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man. La- 
bour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is mate- 
rialised, the latter transformed. That which in the labourer ap- 
peared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality 
without motion. The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging. 



1 The least important commodities of all for the technological compari- 
son of different epochs of production are articles of luxury, in the strict mean- 
ing of the term. However little our written histories up to this time notice 
the development of material production, which is the basis of all social life, 
and therefore of all real history, yet prehistoric times have been classified in 
accordance with the results, not of so-called historical, but of materialistic 
investigations. These periods have been divided, to correspond with the ma- 
terials from which their implements and weapons were made, viz., into 
the stone, the bronze, and the iron ages. 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 181 



If we examine the whole process from the point of view of 
its result, the product, it is plain that both the instruments and 
the subject of labour, are means of production, 1 and that the la- 
bour itself is productive labour. 2 

Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from 
the labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous 
labour, enter into it as means of production. The same use-value 
is both the product of a previous process, and a means of pro- 
duction in a later process. Products are therefore not only results, 
but also essential conditions of labour. 

With the exception of the extractive industries, in which 
the material for labour is provided immediately by Nature, such 
as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter 
is confined to breaking up virgin soil), all branches of industry 
manipulate raw material, objects already filtered through labour, 
already products of labour. Such is seed in agriculture. Animals 
and plants, which we are accustomed to consider as products of 
Nature, are in their present form, not only products of, say last 
year's labour, but the result of a gradual transformation, con- 
tinued through many generations, under man's superintendence, 
and by means of his labour. But in the great majority of cases, 
instruments of labour show even to the most superficial observer, 
traces of the labour of past ages. 

Raw material may either form the principal substance of a 
product, or it may enter into its formation only as an access 
sory. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of la* 
bour, as coal under a boiler, oil by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, 
or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to produce some 
modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached linen, coal 
with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it may help to carry on 
the work itself, as in the case of the materials used for heating 
and lighting workshops. The distinction between principal sub- 
stance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical industries, be- 
cause there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original 
composition, in the substance of the product. 3 



1 It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, 
are a means of production in the fishing industry. But hitherto no one ha3 
discovered the art of catching fish in waters that contain none. 

2 This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- 
process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable 
to the case of the capitalist process of production. 

3 Storch calls true raw materials "matieres," and accessory material 
"materiaux." Gherbuliez describes accessories as "matieres instrumentales.'* 



182 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable 
of being applied to different uses. One and the same product 
may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. 
Corn, for example, is a raw material for millers, starch-manu- 
facturers, distillers, and cattle-breeders. It also enters as raw ma- 
terial into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, 
is at the same time the product of, and a means of production 
in, coal-mining. 

Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same 
process, both as an instrument of labour and as raw material. 
Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is 
the raw material, and at the same time an instrument for the 
production of manure. 

A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may 
yet serve as raw material for a further product, as grapes when 
they become the raw material for wine. On the other hand, la- 
bour may give us its product in such a form, that we can use 
it only as raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and 
yarn. Such a raw material, though itself a product, may have 
to go through a whole series of different processes: in each of 
these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw 
material, until the last process of the series leaves it a perfect 
product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an in- 
strument of labour. 

Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as 
raw material, as instrument of labour, or as product, this is deter- 
mined entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the posi- 
tion it there occupies: as this varies, so does its character. 

Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of produc- 
tion into a new labour-process, it thereby loses its character of 
product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. A spinner 
treats spindles only as implements for spinning, and flax only 
as the material that he spins. Of course it is impossible to spin 
without material and spindles; and therefore the existence of 
these things as products, at the commencement of the spinning 
operation, must be presumed: but in the process itself, the fact 
that they are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter 
indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is of no impor- 
tance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous la- 
bour of the farmer, the miller, and the baker. On the contrary, 
it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means 
of production in any process assert themselves in their character 
of products. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly remind us of 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 183 



Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. In the finished product 
the labour by means of which it has acquired its useful qualities 
is not palpable, has apparently vanished. 

A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is 
useless. In addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence 
of natural forces. Iron rusts and wood rots. Yarn with which 
we neither weave nor knit, is cotton wasted. Living labour must 
seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep, 
change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective 
ones. Bathed in the fire of labour, appropriated as part and par- 
cel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made alive for the per- 
formance of their functions in the process, they are in truth con- 
sumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary constituents 
of new use-values, of new products, ever ready as means of sub- 
sistence for individual consumption, or as means of production 
for some new labour-process. 

If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only 
results, but also necessary conditions, of the labour-process, on 
the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact 
with living labour, is the sole means by which they can be made 
to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised. 

Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its in- 
struments, consumes them, and is therefore a process of consump- 
tion. Such productive consumption is distinguished from indi- 
vidual consumption by this, that the latter uses up products, as 
means of subsistence for the living individual; the former, as 
means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of the living 
individual, is enabled to act. The product, therefore, of individ- 
ual consumption, is the consumer himself, the result of productive 
consumption, is a product distinct from the consumer. 

In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves 
products, labour consumes products in order to create products, 
or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning them 
into means of production for another set. But, just as in the 
beginning, the only participators in the labour-process were man 
and the earth, which latter exists independently of man, so even 
now we still employ in the process many means of production, 
provided directly by Nature, that do not represent any combina- 
tion of natural substances with human labour. 

The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elemen- 
tary factors, is human action with a view to the production of 
use-values, appropriation of natural substances to human re- 
quirements; it is the necessary condition for effecting exchange 



184 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of matter between man and Nature; it is the everlasting Nature- 
imposed condition of human existence, and therefore is inde- 
pendent of every social phase of that existence, or rather, is com- 
mon to every such phase. It was, therefore, not necessary to rep- 
resent our labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and 
his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on the other, 
sufficed. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who grew 
the oats, no more does this simple process tell you of itself what 
are the social conditions under which it is taking place, wheth- 
er under the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the 
capitalist, whether Cincinnatus carries it on in tilling his modest 
farm or a savage in killing wild animals with stones. 1 

Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. We left him 
just after he had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary 
factors of the labour-process; its objective factors, the means of 
production, as well as its subjective factor, labour-power. With 
the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of production 
and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, 
be it spinning, bootmaking, or any other kind. He then proceeds to 
consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought, 
by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, 
to consume the means of production by his labour. The general 
character of the labour-process is evidently not changed by the 
fact, that the labourer works for the capitalist instead of for him- 
self; moreover, the particular methods and operations employed 
in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the 
intervention of the capitalist. He must begin by taking the la- 
bour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be sat- 
isfied with labour of such a kind as would be found in the period 
immediately preceding the rise of capitalists. Changes in the 
methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, 
can take place only at a later period, and therefore will have to 
be treated of in a later chapter. 

The labour-process, turned into the process by which the 
capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic 
phenomena. First, the labourer works under the control of the 



1 By a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Torrens has discov- 
ered, in this stone of the savage the origin of capital. "In the first stone which 
he [the savage] flings at the wild animal he pursues, in the first stick that he 
seizes to strBe down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the ap- 
propriation of one article for the purpose of aiding in jthe acquisition of an- 
other, and thus discover the origin of capital." (R. Torrens: "An Essay on 
the Production of Wealth," &amp;c, pp. 70-71). 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 185 



capitalist to whom his labour belongs; the capitalist taking 
good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that 
the means of production are used with intelligence, so that 
there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear and 
tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by 
the work. 

Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and 
not that of the labourer, its immediate producer. Suppose that a 
capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right 
to use that power for a day belongs to him, just as much as the 
right to use any other commodity, such as a horse that he has 
hired for the day. To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its 
use, and the seller of labour-power, by giving his labour, does 
no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold. 
From the instant he steps into the workshop, the use-value of 
his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour, be- 
longs to the capitalist. By the purchase of labour-power, the cap- 
italist incorporates labour, as a living ferment, with the lifeless 
constituents of the product. From his point of view, the labour- 
process is nothing more than the consumption of the commodity 
purchased, i.e., of labour-power; but this consumption cannot be 
effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means 
of production. The labour-process is a process between things 
that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his 
property. The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, 
just as much as does the wine which is the product of a process 
of fermentation completed in his cellar. 1 



1 "Products are appropriated before they are converted into capital; 
this conversion does not secure them from such appropriation." (Cherbu- 
liez: "Richesse ou Pauvrete," edit. Paris, 1841, p. 54.) "The Proletarian, by 
selling his labour for a definite quantity of the necessaries of life, renounces 
all claim to a share in the product. The mode of appropriation of the prod- 
ucts remains the same as before; it is in no way altered by the bargain we 
have mentioned. The product belongs exclusively to the capitalist, who sup- 
plied the raw "material and the necessaries of life; and this is a rigorous con- 
sequence of the law of appropriation, a law whose fundamental principle was 
the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has an exclusive right to 
the ownership of what he produces." (1. c, p. 58.) "When the labourers receive 
wages for their labour ... the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital 
only" (he means the means of production) "but of the labour also. If what 
is paid as wages is included, as it commonly is, in the term capital, it is ab- 
surd to talk of labour separately from capital, The word capital as thus em- 
ployed includes labour and capital both." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. 
Econ.," &amp;.c. Ed. 1821, pp. 70, 71.) 



186 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 2.— THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as 
yarn, for example, or boots. But, although boots are, in one 
sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a de- 
cided "progressist," yet he does not manufacture boots for their 
own sake. Use-value is, by no means, the thing "qu'on aime 
pour lui-meme" in the production of commodities. Use-values 
are only produced by capitalists, because, and in so far as, they 
are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange-value. 
Our capitalist has two objects in view: in the first place, he wants 
to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange, that is to 
say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and secondly, 
he desires to produce a commodity whose value shall be greater 
than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its pro- 
duction, that is, of the means of production and the labour-power, 
that he purchased with his good money in the open market. His 
aim is to produce not only a use-value, but a commodity also; 
not only use-value, but value; not only value, but at the same 
time surplus-value. 

It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the 
production of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have only 
considered one aspect of the process. Just as commodities are, 
at the same time, use-values and values, so the process of pro* 
ducing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time, a 
process of creating value. 1 

Let us now examine production as a creation of value. 

We know that the value of each commodity is determined 
by the quantity of labour expended on and materialised in it, 
by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, 
for its production. This rule also holds good in the case of the 
product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the labour- 
process carried on for him. Assuming this product to be 10 lbs. 
of yarn, our first step is to calculate the quantity of labour real- 
ised in it. 

For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in 
this case 10 lbs. of cotton. We have no need at present to in- 
vestigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will 



1 As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two 
different expressions for these two different aspects of labour: in the Simple 
Labour-process, the process of producing Use-Values, it is Work; in the 
process of creation of Value, it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly eco- 
nomic sense. — F. E. 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 187 



assume, bought it at its full value, say of ten shillings. In this 
price the labour required for the production of the cotton is al- 
ready expressed in terms of the average labour of society. We will 
further assume that the wear and tear of the spindle, which, for 
our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of la- 
bour employed, amounts to the value of 2s. If, then, twenty-four 
hours' labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the 
quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, 
to begin with, two days' labour already incorporated in the yarn. 

We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance 
that the cotton has taken a new shape while the substance of 
the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. By the general 
law of value, if the value of 40 lbs. of yarn=the value of 40 
lbs. of cotton+the value of a whole spindle, i.e., if the same 
working-time is required to produce the commodities on either 
side of this equation, then 10 lbs. of yarn are an equivalent for 
10 lbs. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a spindle. In the 
case we are considering the same working-time is materialised 
in the 10 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10 lbs. of cotton 
and the fraction of a spindle on the other. Therefore, whether 
value appears in cotton, in a spindle, or in yarn, makes no differ- 
ence in the amount of that value. The spindle and cotton, in- 
stead of resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, 
their forms are altered, and they are turned into yarn; but their 
value is no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had 
been simply exchanged for their equivalent in yarn. 

The labour required for the production of the cotton, the 
raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to pro- 
duce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. The same 
applies to the labour embodied in the spindle, without whose 
wear and tear the cotton could not be spun. 

Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour- 
time required for its production, all the special processes carried 
on at various times and in different places, which were necessary, 
first to produce the cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, 
and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may to- 
gether be looked on as different and successive phases of one and 
the same process. The whole of the labour in the yarn is past la- 
bour; and it is a matter of no importance that the operations nec- 
essary for the production of its constituent elements were car- 
ried on at times which, referred to the present, are more remote 
than the final operation of spinning. If a definite quantity of la- 
bour, say thirty days, is requisite to build a house, the total 



188 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by the fact that 
the work of the last day is done twenty-nine days later than that 
of the first. Therefore the labour contained in the raw material 
and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were la- 
bour expended in an earlier stage of the spinning process, before 
the labour of actual spinning commenced. 

The values of the means of production, i.e., the cotton and the 
spindle, which values are expressed in the price of twelve shil- 
lings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, 
or, in other words, of the value of the product. 

Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. First, the 
cotton and spindle must concur in the production of a use-value; 
they must in the present case become yarn. Value is independent 
of the particular use-value by which it is borne, but it must be 
embodied in a use-value of some kind. Secondly, the time occupied 
in the labour of production must not exceed the time really nec- 
essary under the given social conditions of the case. Therefore, 
if no more than 1 lb. of cotton be requisite to spin 1 lb. of 
yarn, care must be taken that no more than this weight of cotton 
is consumed in the production of 1 lb. of yarn; and similarly 
with regard to the spindle. Though the capitalist have a hobby, 
and use a gold instead of a steel spindle, yet the only labour 
that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which 
would be required to produce a steel spindle, because no more 
is necessary under the given social conditions. 

We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is ow- 
ing to the cotton and the spindle. It amounts to twelve shillings 
or the value of two days' work. The next point for our consideration 
is, what portion of the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by 
the labour of the spinner. 

We have now to consider this labour under a very different 
aspect from that which it had during the labour-process; there, 
we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity 
which changes cotton into yarn; there, the more the labour was 
suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances 
remaining the same. The labour of the spinner was then viewed 
as specifically different from other kinds of productive labour, 
different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, differ- 
ent, on the other hand, in the special character of its operations, 
in the special nature of its means of production and in the special 
use-value of its product. For the operation of spinning, cotton 
and spindles are a necessity, but for making rifled cannon they 
would be of no use whatever. Here, on the contrary, where we con- 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 189 



sider the labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, 
i.e., a source of value, his labour differs in no respect from the la- 
bour of the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly con- 
cerns us), from the labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker 
incorporated in the means of production. It is solely by reason of 
this identity, that cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, 
are capable of forming the component parts, differing only quan- 
titatively from each other, of one whole, namely, the value of the 
yarn. Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the na- 
ture and the specific character of the labour, but merely with its 
quantity. And this simply requires to be calculated. We proceed 
upon the assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, 
the average labour of a given state of society. Hereafter we shall 
see that the contrary assumption would make no difference. 

While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly under- 
goes a transformation: from being motion, it becomes an object 
without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes 
the thing produced. At the end of one hour's spinning, that 
act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; in other words, 
a definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, has become 
embodied in the cotton. We say labour, i.e., the expenditure 
of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning labour, because 
the special work of spinning counts here, only so far as it is the 
expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in so far as it 
is the specific work of the spinner. 

In the process we are now considering it is of extreme im- 
portance, that no more time be consumed in the work of trans- 
forming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given 
social conditions. If under normal, i.e., average social condi- 
tions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into 
b pounds of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour does 
not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of cotton have 
been made into 12 b pounds of yarn; for in the creation of value, 
the time that is socially necessary alone counts. 

Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the 
product now appear in quite a new light, very different from that 
in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. 
The raw material serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite 
quantity of labour. By this absorption it is in fact changed into 
yarn, because it is spun, because labour-power in the form of 
spinning is added to it; but the product, the yarn, is now nothing 
more than a measure of the labour absorbed by the cotton. If 
in one hour l4 lbs. of cotton can be spun into 1 J- lbs, of yarn, then 



190 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

10 lbs. of yarn indicate the absorption of 6 hours' labour. Definite 
quantities of product, these quantities being determined by ex- 
perience, now represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, 
definite masses of crystallised labour-time. They are nothing more 
than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of so- 
cial labour. 

We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the 
labour is the specific work of spinning, that its subject is cotton 
and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject 
itself is already a product and therefore raw material. If the spin- 
ner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the sub- 
ject of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature; never- 
theless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a hundredweight 
for example, would represent a definite quantity of absorbed la- 
bour. 

We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of 
a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that six hours' labour 
is incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount 
of labour is requisite to produce the necessaries of life daily re- 
quired on an average by the labourer. If now our spinner by work- 
ing for one hour, can convert 1-| lbs. of cotton into 1-|- lbs. of 
yarn, * it follows that in six hours he will convert 10 lbs. of cot- 
ton into 10 lbs. of yarn. Hence, during the spinning process, the 
cotton absorbs six hours' labour. The same quantity of labour 
is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of three shillings. 
Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three 
shillings is added to the cotton. 

Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 
lbs. of yarn. Two and a half days' labour has been embodied 
in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in the 
substance of the spindle worn away, and half a day was absorbed 
during the process of spinning. This two and a half days' labour 
is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shil- 
lings. Hence, fifteen shillings is an adequate price for the 10 lbs. 
of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteenpence. 

Our capitalist stares in astonishment. The value of the 
product is exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced. The 
value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been 
created, and consequently money has not been converted into 
capital. The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shil- 
lings were spent in the open market upon the constituent elements 

1 These figures are quite arbitrary. 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS I9f 

of the product, or, what amounts to the same thing, upon the fac- 
tors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid for the cotton, 
two shillings for the substance of the spindle worn away, and three- 
shillings for the labour-power. The swollen value of the yarn is 
of no avail, for it is merely the sum of the values formerly existing 
in the cotton, the spindle, and the labour-power: out of such a 
simple addition of existing values, no surplus-value can possibly 
arise. * These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; 
but so they were also in the sum of fifteen shillings, before it was 
split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities. 

There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. The 
value of one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist 
buys 10 lbs. of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings 
for them. It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready 
built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the mode of 
acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the house. 

Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, ex- 
claims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the express purpose 
of making more money." The way to Hell is paved with good inten- 
tions, and he might just as easily have intended to make money, 
without producing at all. 2 He threatens all sorts of things. He won't 
be caught napping again. In future he will buy the commodities 
in the market, instead of manufacturing them himself. But if 
all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he 
find his commodities in the market? And his money he cannot eat. 
He tries persuasion. "Consider my abstinence; I might have played 
ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I con- 
sumed it productively, and made yarn with it." Very well, and 
by way of reward he is now in possession of good yarn instead of 
a bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would 
never do for him to relapse into such bad ways as that; we have 



1 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine 
of the Physiocrats as to the unproductiveness of all labour that is not agri- 
culture: it is irrefutable for the orthodox economist. "Cette facon d'imputer 
a une seule chose la valeur de plusieurs autres" (par exemple au lin la consom- 
mation du tisserand), "d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plu- 
sieurs valeurs sur une seule, fait que celle-ci grossit d'autant.... Le terme 
d'addition peint tres-bien la maniere dont se forme le prix des ouvrages de 
main-d'oeuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total de plusieurs valeurs consommees 
et additionnees ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas multiplier." ("Mercier 
de la Riviere," 1. c, p. 599.) 

2 Thus from 1844-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive 
employment, in order to throw it away in railway speculations; and so also, 
during the American Civil War, he closed his factory, and turned his work- 
people into the streets, in order to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange. 



192 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

seen before to what results such asceticism leads. Besides, where 
nothing is, the king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit 
of his abstinence, there is nothing wherewith specially to remu- 
nerate it, because the value of the product is merely the sum of the 
values of the commodities that were thrown into the process of pro- 
duction. Let him therefore console himself with the reflection that 
virtue is its own reward. But no, he becomes importunate. He says: 
"The yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale." In that case 
let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the future produce only 
things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his phy- 
sician MacCulloch has already prescribed as infallible against 
an epidemic of over-production. He now gets obstinate. "Can 
the labourer," he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, produce 
commodities out of nothing? Did I not supply him with the mate- 
rials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be 
embodied? And as the greater part of society consists of such ne'er- 
do-wells, have I not rendered society incalculable service by my 
instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not 
only society, but the labourer also, whom in addition I have pro- 
vided with the necessaries of life? And am I to be allowed nothing 
in return for all this service?" Well, but has not the labourer 
rendered him the equivalent service of changing his cotton 
and spindle into yarn? Moreover, there is here no question 
of service. x A service is nothing more than the useful effect of a 
use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour. 2 But here we are 
dealing with exchange-value. The capitalist paid to the labourer 
a value of 3 shillings, and the labourer gave him back an exact 
equivalent in the value of 3 shillings, added by him to the cotton: 
he gave him value for value. Our friend, up to this time so purse- 
proud, suddenly assumes the modest demeanour of his own work- 



1 "Extol thyself, put on finery and adorn thyself ... but whoever takes 
more or better than he gives, that is usury, and is not service, but wrong done 
to his neighbour, as when one steals and robs. All is not service and benefit 
to a neighbour that is called service and benefit. For an adulteress and adul- 
terer do one another great service and pleasure. A horseman does an incendiary 
a great service, by helping him to rob on the highway, and pillage land and 
houses. The papists do ours a great service, in that they don't drown, burn, 
murder all of them, or let them all rot in prison; but let some live, and only 
drive them out, or take from them what they have. The devil himself does 
his servants inestimable service.... To sum up, the world is full of great, 
excellent, and daily service and benefit." (Martin Luther: "An die Pfarrherrn 
wider den Wucher zu predigen," Wittenberg, 1540.) 

2 In "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oek.," p. 14, I make the following remark 
on this point — "It is not difficult to understand what 'service' the category 
'service' must render to a class of economists like J. B. Say and F. Bastiat." 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 193 



man, and exclaims: "Have I myself not worked? Have I not per- 
formed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spin- 
ner? And does not this labour, too, create value?" His overlooker 
and his manager try to hide their smiles. Meanwhile, after a 
hearty laugh, he re-assumes his usual mien. Though he chanted 
to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he says, he 
would not give a brass farthing for it. He leaves this and all such 
like subterfuges and juggling tricks to the professors of Political 
Economy, who are paid for it. He himself is a practical man; and 
though he does not always consider what he says outside his 
business, yet in his business he knows what he is about. 

Let us examine the matter more closely. The value of a day's 
labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our assumption 
half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, 
i.e., because the means of subsistence that are daily required 
for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's labour. But 
the past labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the liv- 
ing labour that it can call into action; the daily cost of maintain- 
ing it, and its daily expenditure in work, are two totally differ- 
ent things. The former determines the exchange-value of the la- 
bour-power, the latter is its use-value. The fact that half a day's 
labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, 
does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day. 
Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the value which that la- 
bour-power creates in the labour-process, are two entirely differ- 
ent magnitudes; and this difference of the two values was what the 
capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. 
The useful qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue 
of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing more than 
a conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be 
expended in a useful manner. What really influenced him was 
the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being 
a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself. 
This is the special service that the capitalist expects from la- 
bour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with 
the "eternal laws" of the exchange of commodities. The seller 
of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity, realises 
its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. He cannot take 
the one without giving the other. The use-value of labour-power, 
or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as 
the use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer 
who has sold it. The owner of the money has paid the value of 
a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day, a 



194 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

day's labour belongs to him. The circumstance, that on the one 
hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's 
labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can 
work during a whole day, that consequently the value which its 
use during one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, 
this circumstance is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the 
buyer, but by no means an injury to the seller. 

Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the 
cause of his laughter. The labourer therefore finds, in the work- 
shop, the means of production necessary for working, not only 
during six, but during twelve hours. Just as during the six hours' 
process our 10 lbs. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and 
became 10 lbs. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. of cotton will absorb 12 
hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs. of yarn. Let us now 
examine the product of this prolonged process. There is now mate- 
rialised in this 20 lbs. of yarn the labour of five days, of which 
four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of the spindle, 
the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton during 
the spinning process. Expressed in gold, the labour of five days 
is thirty shillings. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. of 
yarn, giving, as before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. 
But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered into 
the process amounts to 27 shillings. The value of the yarn is 30 
shillings. Therefore the value of the product is -j greater than the 
value advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been trans- 
formed into 30 shillings; a surplus-value of 3 shillings has been 
created. The trick has at last succeeded; money has been converted 
into capital. 

Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws 
that regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way 
violated. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. For 
the capitalist as buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, 
the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. He then did 
what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed 
their use-value. The consumption of the labour-power, which 
was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 
lbs. of yarn, having a value of 30 shillings. The capitalist, for- 
merly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities. 
He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact 
value. Yet for all that he withdraws 3 shillings more from circu- 
lation than he originally threw into it. This metamorphosis, 
this conversion of money into capital, takes place both within 
the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the circulation, 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 195 

because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in the 
market; outside the circulation, because what is done within 
it is only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus-value, 
a process which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. 
Thus "tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possi- 
bles." 

By turning his money into commodities that serve as the 
material elements of a new product, and as factors in the labour- 
process, by incorporating living labour with their dead sub- 
stance, the capitalist at the same time converts value, i.e., past r 
materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with 
value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies. 

If we now compare the two processes of producing value and 
of creating surplus-value, we see that the latter is nothing but 
the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. If on 
the one hand the process be not carried beyond the point, where 
the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is replaced 
by an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of producing value; 
if, on the other hand, it be continued beyond that point, it be- 
comes a process of creating surplus-value. 

If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing 
value with the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that 
the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces 
use-values. Here we contemplate the labour as producing a par- 
ticular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, 
with regard to its end and aim. But viewed as a value-creating 
process, the same labour-process presents itself under its quanti- 
tative aspect alone. Here it is a question merely of the time occu- 
pied by the labourer in doing the work; of the period during which 
the labour-power is usefully expended. Here, the commodities 
that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary 
adjuncts of labour-power in the production of a definite, useful 
object. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed 
or materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied 
in the means of production, or incorporated in them for the first 
time during the process by the action of labour-power, counts in 
either case only according to its duration; it amounts to so many 
hours or days as the case may be. 

Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production 
of any article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, 
is necessary. The consequences of this are various. In the first 
place, it becomes necessary that the labour should be carried on 
under normal conditions. If a self-acting mule is the implement 



196 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the 
spinner with a distaff and spinning wheel. The cotton too must 
not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but 
must be of suitable quality. Otherwise the spinner would be found 
to spend more time in producing a pound of yarn than is socially 
necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither 
value nor money. But whether the material factors of the process 
are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the labourer, but 
entirely upon the capitalist. Then again, the labour-power itself 
must be of average efficacy. In the trade in which it is being em- 
ployed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness 
prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy 
labour-power of such normal goodness. This power must be ap- 
plied with the average amount of exertion and with the usual 
degree of intensity; and the capitalist is as careful to see that 
this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a single moment. 
He has bought the use of the labour-power for a definite period, 
and he insists upon his rights. He has no intention of being 
robbed. Lastly, and for this purpose our friend has a penal code of 
his own, all wasteful consumption of raw material or instruments 
of labour is strictly forbidden, because what is so wasted, repre- 
sents labour superfluously expended, labour that does not count 
in the product or enter into its value. 1 



1 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave la- 
bour such a costly process. The labourer here is, to use a striking expression 
of the ancients, distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale, from an ani- 
mal as instrumentum semi-vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum 
mutum. But he himself takes care to let both beast and implement feel that 
he is none of them, but is a man. He convinces himself with immense satis- 
faction, that he is a different being, by treating the one unmercifully and 
damaging the other con amore. Hence the principle, universally applied 
in this method of production, only to employ the rudest and heaviest imple- 
ments and such as are difficult to damage owing to their sheer clumsiness. 
In the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of the 
civil war, ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the 
soil like a hog or a mole, instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. 
Conf. J. E. Cairnes. "The Slave Power," London, 1862, p. 46 sqq. In his "Sea 
Board Slave States," Olmsted tells us: "I am here shown tools that no man 
in his senses, with us, would allow a labourer, for whom he was paying 
wages, to be encumbered with; and the excessive weight and clumsi- 
ness of which, I would judge, would make work at least ten per cent 
greater than with those ordinarily used with us And I am assured that, 
in the careless and clumsy way they must be used by the slaves, anything 
lighter or less rude could not be furnished them with good economy, and that 
such tools as we constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving 
them, would not last out a day in a Virginia cornfield— much lighter and 



THE LABOUR-PROCESS 197 



We now see, that the difference between labour, considered 
on the one hand as producing utilities, and on the other hand, 
as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our anal- 
ysis of a commodity, resolves itself into a distinction between two 
aspects of the process of production. 

The process of production, considered on the one hand as 
the unity of the labour-process and the process of creating value, 
is production of commodities; considered on the other hand as 
the unity of the labour-process and the process of producing sur- 
plus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, or capitalist 
production of commodities. 

We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus- 
value it does not in the least matter, whether the labour ap- 
propriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of aver- 
age quality or more complicated skilled labour. All labour 
of a higher or more complicated character than average labour 
is expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour- 
power whose production has cost more lime and labour, and 
which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple 
labour-power. This power being of higher value, its consump- 
tion is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times 
proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. What- 
ever difference in skill there may be between the labour of a 
spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which 
the jeweller merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, 
does not in any way differ in quality from the additional portion 
by which he creates surplus-value. In the making of jewellery, 
just as in spinning, the surplus-value results only from a quanti- 
tative excess of labour, from a lengthening-out of one and the same 
labour-process, in the one case, of the process of making jewels, 
in the other of the process of making yarn. * 



more free from stones though it be than ours. So, too, when I ask why mules 
are so universally substituted for horses on the farm, the first reason given, 
and confessedly the most conclusive one, is that horses cannot bear the treat- 
ment that they always must get from negroes; horses are always soon 
foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear cudgelling, or lose a 
meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not 
take cold or get sick, if neglected or overworked. But I do not need to go 
further than to the window of the room in which I am writing, to see at al- 
most any time, treatment of cattle that would ensure the immediate dis- 
charge of the driver by almost any farmer owning them in the North." 

1 The distinction between skilled and unskilled labour rests in part on 
pure illusion, or, to say the least, on distinctions that have long since ceased 
ot be real, and that survive only by virtue of a traditional convention; in 



198 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, 
the reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, e.g., 
one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoid- 
able. * We therefore save ourselves a superfluous operation, and 
simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the 
workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour. 



part on the helpless condition of some groups of the working-class, a condi- 
tion that prevents them from exacting equally with the rest the value of 
their labour-power. Accidental circumstances here play so great a part, that 
these two forms of labour sometimes change places. Where, for instance, the 
physique of the working-class has deteriorated, and is, relatively speaking, 
exhausted, which is the case in all countries with a well developed capitalist 
production, the lower forms of labour, which demand great expenditure of 
muscle, are in general considered as skilled, compared with much more 
delicate forms of labour; the latter sink down to the level of unskilled labour. 
Take as an example the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies 
a much higher level than that of damask-weaver. Again, although the la- 
bour of a fustian cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same 
time unhealthy, yet it counts only as unskilled labour. And then, we must 
not forget, that the so-called skilled labour does not occupy a large space 
in the field of national labour. Laing estimates that in England (and Wales) 
the livelihood of 11,300,000 people depends on unskilled labour. If from 
the total population of 18,000,000 living at the time when he wrote, we 
deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population," and 1,500,000 for paupers, 
vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &amp;c, and 4,650,000 who compose the mid- 
dle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. But in his middle- 
class he includes people that live on the interest of small investments, offi- 
cials, men of letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like, and in order to swell 
the number he also includes in these 4,650,000 the better paid portion of the 
factory operatives! The bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. (S. Laing: 
"National Distress," &amp;c, London, 1844.) "The great class who have nothing 
to give for food but ordinary labour, are the great bulk of the people." (James 
Mill, in art.: "Colony," Supplement to the Encyclop. Brit., 1831.) 

1 "Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it neces- 
sarily implies labour of one particular kind ... the proportion which the other 
kinds bear to it being easily ascertained." ("Outlines of Pol. Econ.," Lond. 
1832, pp. 22 and 23.) 



199 



CHAPTER VIII 
CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 

The various factors of the labour-process play different parts 
in forming the value of the product. 

The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour 
by expending upon it a given amount of additional labour, no 
matter what the specific character and utility of that labour 
may be. On the other hand, the values of the means of production 
used up in the process are preserved, and present themselves 
afresh as constituent parts of the value of the product; the values 
of the cotton and the spindle, for instance, re-appear again in the 
value of the yarn. The value of the means of production is there- 
fore preserved, by being transferred to the product. This transfer 
takes place during the conversion of those means into a product, 
or in other words, during the labour-process. It is brought about 
by labour; but how? 

The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one 
in order to add value to the cotton, the other in order to pre- 
serve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts 
to the same thing, to transfer to the yarn, to the product, the 
value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value of 
the spindle with which he works. But, by the very act of adding 
new value, he preserves their former values. Since, however, the 
addition of new value to the subject of his labour, and the pres- 
ervation of its former value, are two entirely distinct results, 
produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one operation, 
it is plain that this two-fold nature of the result can be explained 
only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one and the same 
time, it must in one character create value, and in another charac- 
ter preserve or transfer value. 

Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour 
and consequently new value? Evidently, only by labouring 



200 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the 
weaver by weaving, the smith by forging. But, while thus in- 
corporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the particular 
form alone of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving and the 
forging respectively, that the means of production, the cotton 
and spindle, the yarn and loom, and the iron and anvil become 
constituent elements of the product, of a new use-value. ! Each 
use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in 
a new use-value. Now, we saw, when we were considering the proc- 
ess of creating value, that, if a use-value be effectively consumed 
in the production of a new use-value, the quantity of labour ex- 
pended in the production of the consumed article, forms a portion 
of the quantity of labour necessary to produce the new use-value; 
this portion is therefore labour transferred from the means of pro- 
duction to the new product. Hence, the labourer preserves the values 
of the consumed means of production, or transfers them as portions 
of its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, 
abstractedly considered, but by virtue of the particular useful 
character of that labour, by virtue of its special productive form. 
In so far then as labour is such specific productive activity, in 
so far as it is spinning, weaving, or forging, it raises, by mere con- 
tact, the means of production from the dead, makes them living 
factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form the 
new products. 

If the special productive labour of the workman were not 
spinning, he could not convert the cotton into yarn, and there- 
fore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to 
the yarn. Suppose the same workman were to change his oc- 
cupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour 
add value to the material he works upon. Consequently, we 
see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by vir- 
tue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joineringin 
particular, but because it is labour in the abstract, a portion 
of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value 
added is of a given definite amount, not because his labour has 
a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time. 
On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as 
being expenditure of human labour-power in the abstract, that 
spinning adds new value to the values of the cotton and the spin- 
dle; and on the other hand, it is by virtue of its special character, 



1 "Labour gives a new creation for one extinguished." ("An Essay on 
the Polit. Econ. oi Nations," London, 1821, p. 13.) 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 201 

as being a concrete, useful process, that the same labour of spin- 
ning both transfers the values of the means of production to 
the product, and preserves them in the product. Hence at one and 
the same time there is produced a two-fold result. 

By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new 
value is added, and by the quality of this added labour, the orig- 
inal values of the means of production are preserved in the prod- 
uct. This two-fold effect, resulting from the two-fold character of 
labour, may be traced in various phenomena. 

Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to 
spin as much cotton in 6 hours as he was able to spin before in 
36 hours. His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for 
the purposes of useful production. The product of 6 hours' work 
has increased six-fold, from 6 lbs. to 36 lbs. But now the 36 lbs. 
of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as formerly did 
the 6 lbs. One-sixth as much new labour is absorbed by each pound 
of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to 
each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was. On the other 
hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. of yarn, the value transferred 
from the cotton is six times as great as before. By the 6 hours' 
spinning, the value of the raw material preserved and transferred 
to the product is six times as great as before, although the new 
value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the very 
same raw material is one-sixth what it was formerly. This shows 
that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in 
one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are 
essentially different. On the one hand, the longer the time neces- 
sary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the 
new value added to the material; on the other hand, the greater 
the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the 
value preserved, by being transferred from it to the product. 

Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's 
labour, instead of varying, remains constant, that he therefore 
requires the same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound 
of cotton into yarn, but that the exchange-value of the cotton 
varies, either by rising to six times its former value or falling to 
one-sixth of that value. In both these cases, the spinner puts the 
same quantity of labour into a pound of cotton, and therefore 
adds as much value, as he did before the change in the value: 
he also produces a given weight of yarn in the same time as he did 
before. Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the cotton 
to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, 
or, as the case may be, six times as much as before, The same 



202 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises 
or falls, while their useful efficacy in the process remains unal- 
tered. 

Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process re- 
main unchanged, and no change of value takes place in the means 
of production, the spinner continues to consume in equal work- 
ing-times equal quantities of raw material, and equal quanti- 
ties of machinery of unvarying value. The value that he preserves 
in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he 
adds to the product. In two weeks he incorporates twice as much 
labour, and therefore twice as much value, as in one week, and 
during the same time he consumes twice as much material, and 
wears out twice as much machinery, of double the value in 
each case; he therefore preserves, in the product of two weeks, 
twice as much value as in the product of one week. So long as 
the conditions of production remain the same, the more value the 
labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and pre- 
serves; but he does so merely because this addition of new value 
takes place under conditions that have not varied and are inde- 
pendent of his own labour. Of course, it may be said in one sense, 
that the labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the 
quantity of new value that he adds. Whether the value of cotton 
rise from one shilling to two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the 
workman invariably preserves in the product of one hour only one 
half as much value as he preserves in two hours. In like manner, 
if the productiveness of his own labour varies by rising or falling, 
he will in one hour spin either more or less cotton, as the case may 
be, than he did before, and will consequently preserve in the 
product of one hour, more or less value of cotton; but, all the 
same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice as much value 
as he will by one. 

Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave 
out of consideration its purely symbolical representation by 
tokens. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour- 
power, is a natural object, a thing, although a. living conscious 
thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in 
him.) If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its 
value. The reason why means of production do not lose their 
value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this: 
they lose in the labour-process the original form of their use-^ 
value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. 
But, however important it may be to value, that it should have 
some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a matter of 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 203 

complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; 
this we saw when treating of the metamorphosis of commodities. 
Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of pro- 
duction transfer their value to the product only so far as along 
with their use-value they lose also their exchange-value. They 
give up to the product that value alone which they themselves 
lose as means of production. But in this respect the material fac- 
tors of the labour-process do not all behave alike. 

The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a 
trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are 
greased. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish 
but re-appear as properties of the product. Raw material forms 
the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its 
form. Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the char- 
acteristic form with which they are clothed on entering the labour- 
process. It is otherwise with the instruments of labour. Tools, 
machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in the labour-proc- 
ess, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are ready 
each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged. 
And just as during their lifetime, that is to say, during the con- 
tinued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape 
independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death. 
The corpses of machines, tools, workshops, &amp;c, are always sepa- 
rate and distinct from the product they helped to turn out. If we 
now consider the case of any instrument of labour during the whole 
period of its service, from the day of its entry into the workshop, 
till the day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that 
during this period its use-value has been completely consumed, 
and therefore its exchange-value completely transferred to the 
product. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 years, 
it is plain that during that working period its total value is 
gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. The life- 
time of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the repeti- 
tion of a greater or less number of similar operations. Its life may 
be compared with that of a human being. Every day brings a man 
24 hours nearer to his grave: but how many days he has still to 
travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking 
at him. This difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance 
offices from drawing, by means of the theory of averages, very ac- 
curate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions. So it 
is with the instruments of labour. It is known by experience 
how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last. 
Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days, 



204 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Then, on the average, it loses each day one-sixth of its use- value, 
and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. 
The wear and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, 
and the corresponding quantity of value they part with to the 
product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis. 

It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never 
transfer more value to the product than they themselves lose 
during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use- 
value. If such an instrument has no value to lose, if, in other 
words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no 
value to the product. It helps to create use-value without con- 
tributing to the formation of exchange-value. In this class are 
included all means of production supplied by Nature without 
human assistance, such as land, wind, water, metals in situ, and 
timber in virgin forests. 

Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. 
Suppose a machine to be worth £1,000, and to wear out in 1,000 
days. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is 
daily transferred to the day's product. At the same time, though 
with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues to 
take part in the labour-process. Thus it appears, that one factor 
of the labour-process, a means of production, continually enters 
as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the 
formation of value by fractions only. The difference between the 
two processes is here reflected in their material factors, by the 
same instrument of production taking part as a whole in the labour- 
process, while at the same time as an element in the formation 
of value, it enters only by fractions. l 



1 The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern 
us here. A machine that is undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an 
instrument, but that of a subject of labour. Work is no longer done with it, 
but upon it. It is quite permissible tor our purpose to assume, that the labour 
expended on the repairs of instruments is included in the labour necessary 
for their original production. But in the text we deal with that wear and tear, 
which no doctor can cure, and which little by little brings about death, with 
"that kind of wear which cannot be repaired from time to time, and which, 
in the case of a knife, would ultimately reduce it to a state in which the cut- 
ler would say of it, it is not worth a new blade." We have shewn in the text, 
that a machine takes part in every labour-process as an integral machine, 
but that into the simultaneous process of creating value it enters only bit by 
bit. How great then is the confusion of ideas exhibited in the following ex- 
tract! "Mr. Ricardo says a portion of the labour of the engineer in making 
{stocking] machines" is contained for example in the value of a pair of stock- 
ings. "Yet the total labour, that produced each single pair of stockings ... 
includes the whole labour of the engineer, not a portion; for one machine 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 205 

On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a 
whole in the formation of value, while into the labour-process 
it enters only bit by bit. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the 
waste for every 115 lbs. used amounts to 15 lbs., which is con- 
verted, not into yarn, but into "devil's dust." Now, although 
this 15 lbs. of cotton never becomes a constituent element of 
the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be normal and 
inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is 
just as surely transferred to the value of the yarn, as is the value 
of the 100 lbs. that form the substance of the yarn. The use- 
value of 15 lbs. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs. 
of yarn can be made. The destruction of this cotton is therefore 
a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. And because 
it is a necessary condition, and for no other reason, the value of 
that cotton is transferred to the product. The same holds good 
for every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so far at 
least as such refuse cannot be further employed as a means in 
the production of new and independent use-values. Such an employ- 
ment of refuse may be seen in the large machine works at Manches- 
ter, where mountains of iron turnings are carted away to the found- 
ry in the evening, in order the next morning to re-appear in the 
workshops as solid masses of iron. 

We have seen that the means of production transfer value to 
the new product, so far only as during the labour-process they 
lose value in the shape of their old use-value. The maximum 
loss of value that they can suffer in the process, is plainly limit- 
ed by the amount of the original value with which they came 
into the process, or in other words, by the labour-time necessary 
for their production. Therefore, the means of production can 
never add more value to the product than they themselves possess 
independently of the process in which they assist. However use- 
ful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or other means of 
production may be, though it may cost £150, or, say, 500 days' 
labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to the value 
of the product more than £150. Its value is determined not by the 



makes many pairs, and none of those pairs could have been done without any 
part of the machine." ("Obs. on Certain Verbal Disputes in Pol. Econ., Partic- 
ularly Relating to Value," p. 54.) The author, an uncommonly self-satis- 
fied wiseacre, is right in his confusion and therefore in his contention, to 
this extent only, that neither Ricardo nor any other economist, before or 
since him, has accurately distinguished the two aspects of labour, and still 
less, therefore, the part played by it under each of these aspects in the for- 
mation of value. 



206 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but 
by that out of which it has issued as a product. In the labour- 
process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful 
properties, and could not, therefore, transfer any value to the 
product, unless it possessed such value previously. 1 

While productive labour is changing the means of produc- 
tion into constituent elements of a new product, their value un- 
dergoes a metempsychosis. It deserts the consumed body, to 
occupy the newly created one. But this transmigration takes 
place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. He is unable 
to add new labour, to create new value, without at the same time 
preserving old values, and this, because the labour he adds must 
be of a specific useful kind; and he cannot do work of a useful 
kind, without employing products as the means of production of 
a new product, and thereby transferring their value to the new 
product. The property therefore which labour-power in action, 
living labour, possesses of preserving value, at the same time that 
it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing, 
but which is very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it 
preserves the existing value of his capital. 2 So long as trade is 



1 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. B. Say, who pretends 
to account for surplus-value (Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services produc- 
tifs" which the means of production, soil, instruments, and raw material, 
render in the labour-process by means of their use-values. Mr. Wm. Roscher 
who seldom loses an occasion of registering, in black and white, ingenious 
apologetic fancies, records the following specimen: — "J. B. Say (Traite, 
t. 1. ch. 4) very truly remarks: the value produced by an oil mill, after de- 
duction of all costs, is something new, something quite different from the 
labour by which the oil mill itself was erected." (1. c, p. 82, note.) Very 
true, Mr. Professor! the oil produced by the oil mill is indeed something very 
different from the labour expended in constructing the mill! By value, Mr. 
Roscher understands such stuff as "oil," because oil has value, notwithstand- 
ing that "Nature" produces petroleum, though relatively "in small quanti- 
ties," a fact to which he seems to refer in his further observation: "It (Nature) 
produces scarcely any exchange-value." Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the ex- 
change-value it produces are rather like the foolish virgin who admitted in- 
deed that she had had a child, but "it was such a little one." This "savant 
serieux" in continuation remarks: "Ricardo's school is in the habit of in- 
cluding capital as accumulated labour under the head of labour. This is 
unskilful work, because, indeed, the owner of capital, after all, does some- 
thing more than the merely creating and preserving of the same: namely, 
the abstention from the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, e.g., inter- 
est." (1. c.) How very "skilful" is this "anatomico-physiological method" 
of Political Economy, which, "indeed," converts a mere desire "after all" 
into a source of value. 

2 "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... 
is that on which he is most to rely for the repayment of his capital. The other 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 207 

good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to 
take notice of this gratuitous gift of labour. A violent interrup- 
tion of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware 
of it. 1 

As regards the means of production, what is really consumed 
is their use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour 
results in the product. There is no consumption of their value, 2 
and it would therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. 
It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it under^ 
goes itself in the process; but because the article in which it 
originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some 
other article. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a re- 
appearance of the value of the means of production, but there 
is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. That which 
is produced is a new use-value in which the old exchange-value 
re-appears. 3 



two ... the working stock of the cattle and the ... carts, ploughs, spades, and 
so forth, without a given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund 
Burke: "Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right 
Hon. W. Pitt, in the month of November 1795," Edit. London, 1800, p. 10.) 

1 In The Times of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill 
employed 800 hands, and consumed, on the average, 150 bales of East Indian, 
or 130 bales of American cotton, complains, in doleful manner, of the stand- 
ing expenses of his factory when not working. He estimates them at £6,000 
a year. Among them are a number of items that do not concern us here, such 
as rent, rates, and taxes, insurance, salaries of the manager, book-keeper, 
engineer, and others. Then he reckons £150 for coal used to heat the mill 
occasionally, and run the engine now and then. Besides this, he includes 
the wages of the people employed at odd times to keep the machinery in 
working order. Lastly, he puts down £1,200 for depreciation of machinery, 
because "the weather and the natural principle of decay do not suspend their 
operations because the steam-engine ceases to revolve." He says, emphati- 
cally, he does not estimate his depreciation at more than the small sum of 
£1,200, because his machinery is already nearly worn out. 

2 "Productive consumption ... where the consumption of a commodity 
is a part of the process of production. ... In these instances there is no con- 
sumption of value." (S. P. Newman, I. c, p. 296.) 

3 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 edi- 
tions, this passage occurs: "It matters not in what form capital re-ap- 
pears;" then after a lengthy enumeration of all the possible ingredients of 
production whose value re-appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: 
"The various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence 
and comfort of the human being, are also changed. They are consumed from 
time to time, and their value re-appears in that new vigour imparted to 
his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be employed again in the work 
of production." (F. Way land, 1. c, pp. 31, 32.) Without noticing any other 
oddities, it suffices to observe, that what re-appears in the fresh vigour, is 
not the bread's price, but its blood-forming substances. What, on the other 



208 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-proc- 
ess, with labour-power in action. While the labourer, by virtue 
of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a special object, 
preserves and transfers to the product the value of the means of 
production, he at the same time, by the mere act of working, 
creates each instant an additional or new value. Suppose the proc- 
ess of production to be stopped just when the workman has pro- 
duced an equivalent for the value of his own labour-power, when, 
for example, by six hours' labour, he has added a value of three 
shillings. This value is the surplus, of the total value of the prod- 
uct, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of pro- 
duction. It is the only original bit of value formed during this 
process, the only portion of the value of the product created by 
this process. Of course, we do not forget that this new value only 
replaces the money advanced by the capitalist in the purchase 
of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the necessaries 
of life. With regard to the money spent, the new value is merely 
a reproduction; but, nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in 
the case of the value of the means of production, only an apparent, 
reproduction. The substitution of one value for another, is here 
effected by the creation of new value. 

We know, however, from what has gone before, that the 
labour-process may continue beyond the time necessary to re- 
produce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for 
the value of the labour-power. Instead of the six hours that are 
sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue for 
twelve hours. The action of labour-power, therefore, not only 
reproduces its own value, but produces value over and above it. 
This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the prod- 
uct and the value of the elements consumed in the formation of 
that product, in other words, of the means of production and the 
labour-power. 

By our explanation of the different parts played by the vari- 
ous factors of the labour-process in the formation of the prod- 
uct's value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the 
different functions allotted to the different elements of capital 



hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, 
but their value. The same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form 
just as much muscle and bone, just as much vigour, but not vigour of the 
same value This confusion of "value" and "vigour" coupled with our author's 
Pharisaical indefiniteness, mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash 
out an explanation of surplus-value from a mere re-appearance of pre- 
existing values. 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 209 

in the process of expanding its own value. The surplus of the 
total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its con- 
stituent factors, is the surplus of the expanded capital over the 
capital originally advanced. The means of production on the 
one hand, labour-power on the other, are merely the different 
modes of existence which the value of the original capital assumed 
when from being money it was transformed into the various 
factors of the labour-process. That part of capital then, which is 
represented by the means of production, by the raw material, aux- 
iliary material and the instruments of labour, does not, in the 
process of production, undergo any quantitative alteration of 
value. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more 
shortly, constant capital. 

On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by 
labour-power, does, in the process of production, undergo an 
alteration of value. It both reproduces the equivalent of its 
own value-, and also produces an excess, a surplus-value, which 
may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. 
This part of capital is continually being transformed from 
a constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call it the 
variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. The 
same elements of capital which, from the point of view of 
the labour-process, present themselves respectively as the 
objective and subjective factors, as means of production and 
labour-power, present themselves, from the point of view 
of the process of creating surplus-value, as constant and variable 
capital. 

The definition of constant capital given above by no means 
excludes the possibility of a change of value in its elements. 
Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, 
and the next day, in consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, 
a shilling a pound. Each pound of the cotton bought at six- 
pence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the 
product a value of one shilling; and the cotton already spun 
before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, 
likewise transfers to the product twice its original value. It is 
plain, however, that these changes of value are independent 
of the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cot- 
ton by the spinning itself. If the old cotton had never been spun, 
it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of 
at sixpence. Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone 
through, the more certain is this result. We therefore find that 
speculators make it a rule when such sudden changes in value 



210 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

occur, to speculate in that material on which the least possible 
quantity of labour has been spent: to speculate, therefore, in yarn 
rather than in cloth, in cotton itself, rather than in yarn. The 
change of value in the case we have been considering, originates, 
not in the process in which the cotton plays the part of a means 
of production, and in which it therefore functions as constant 
capital, but in the process in which the cotton itself ;s produced. 
The value of a commodity, it is true, is determined by the quan- 
tity of labour contained in it, but this quantity is itself limited 
by social conditions. If the time socially necessary for the pro- 
duction of any commodity alters— and a given weight of cotton 
represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than after a good 
one — all previously existing commodities of the same class are 
affected, because they are, as it were, only individuals of the 
species, * and their value at any given time is measured by the 
labour socially necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their 
production under the then existing social conditions. 

As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may 
that of the instruments of labour, of the machinery, &amp;c, em- 
ployed in the process; and consequently that portion of the 
value of the product transferred to it from them, may also change. 
If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a particular 
kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure of labour, 
the old machinery becomes depreciated more or less, and conse- 
quently transfers so much less value to the product. But here again, 
the change in value originates outside the process in which the 
machine is acting as a means of production. Once engaged in this 
process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it pos- 
sesses apart from the process. 

Just as a change in the value of the means of production, 
even after they have commenced to take a part in the labour- 
process, does not alter their character as constant capital, so, too, 
a change in the proportion of constant to variable capital does 
not affect the respective functions of these two kinds of capital. 
The technical conditions of the labour-process may be revolution- 
ised to such an extent, that where formerly ten men using ten 
implements of small value worked up a relatively small quanti- 
ty of raw material, one man may now, with the aid of one expen- 
sive machine, work up one hundred times as much raw material. 



1 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne /orment proprement 
qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- 
stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 893.) 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 211 

In the latter case we have an enormous increase in the constant 
capital, that is represented by the total value of the means of 
production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the 
variable capital, invested in labour-power. Such a revolution, 
however, alters only the quantitative relation between the con- 
stant and the variable capital, or the proportions in which the 
total capital is split up into its constant and variable constituents; 
it has not in the least degree affected the essential difference be- 
tween the two. 



212 



CHAPTER IX 
THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

SECTION 1.— THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION 
OF LABOUR-POWER 

The surplus-value generated in the process of production by G, 
the capital advanced, or in other words, the self-expansion of 
the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, 
in the first place, as a surplus, as the amount by which the value 
of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements. 

The capital G is made up of two components, one, the sum 
of money c laid out upon the means of production, and the oth- 
er, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-power; c rep- 
resents the portion that has become constant capital, and v the 
portion that has become variable capital. At first then, C=c-fv: 
for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its components may 
be such that the £500 =£410 const. -+-£90 var. When the process 
of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value =(c+ 
v)-j-s, where s is the surplus-value; or taking our former figures, 
the value of this commodity may be (£410 const. + £90 var.)+ 
£90 surpl. The original capital has now changed from C to C', 
from £500 to £590. The difference is s or a surplus-value of £90. 
Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is equal 
to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, 
that the excess of the value of the product over the value of its 
constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital ad- 
vanced or to the surplus-value produced. 

Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more 
closely. The two things compared are, the value of the product 
and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of pro- 
duction. Now we have seen how that portion of v the constant cap- 
ital which consists of the instruments of labour, transfers to the 
production only fraction of its value, while the remainder of that 



THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 213 

value continues to reside in those instruments. Since this remain- 
der plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present 
leave it on one side. To introduce it into the calculation would 
make no difference. For instance, taking our former example, 
c=£410: suppose this sum to consist of £312 value of raw mate- 
rial, £44 value of auxiliary material, and £54 value of the machin- 
ery worn away in the process; and suppose that the total value 
of the machinery employed is £1,054. Out of this latter sum, then, 
we reckon as advanced for the purpose of turning out the product, 
the sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and 
tear in the process; for this is all it parts with to the product. 
Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still con- 
tinues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought 
also to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus make 
it appear on both sides of our calculation. 1 We should, in this 
way, get £1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. The differ- 
ence of these two sums, or the surplus-value, would still be £90. 
Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced 
for the production of value, we always mean, unless the context 
is repugnant thereto, the value of the means of production actually 
consumed in the process, and that value alone. 

This being so, let us return to the formula C = c+v, which 
we saw was transformed into C'=(c+v)+s, C becoming C\ We 
know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, 
and merely re-appears in the product. The new value actually 
created in the process, the value produced, or value-product, is 
therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as 
it would at first sight appear (c+v)+s or £410 const. + £90 var.-f- 
£90 surpl.; but v+s or £90 var.-f £90 surpl. not £590 but £180. 
If c=0, or in other words, if there were branches of industry in 
which the capitalist could dispense with all means of production 
made by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary 
material, or instruments of labour, employing only labour-power 
and. materials supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be 
no constant capital to transfer to the product. This component 
of the value of the product, i.e., the £410 in our example, would 
be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value cre- 
ated, or the value produced, which contains £90 of surplus-value, 
would remain just as great as if c represented the highest value 



1 "If we reckon the value of the fixed capital employed as a part of 
the advances, we must reckon the remaining value of such capital at the end 
of the year as a part of the annual returns." (Malthus, "Princ. of Pol. Econ." 
2nd ed., Lond.. 1836, p. 269.) 



214 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

imaginable. We should have G=(0+v) = v or C the expanded 
capital =v+s and therefore C— G = s as before. On the other hand, 
if s=0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whose value is 
advanced in the form of variable capital, were to produce only 
its equivalent, we should have C=c+v or C the value of the 
product =(c+v)+0 or G— C. The capital advanced would, in 
this case, not have expanded its value. 

From what has gone before, we know that surplus- value is 
purely the result of a variation in the value of v, of that portion 
of the capital which is transformed into labour-power; con- 
sequently, v-fs=v+v' or v plus an increment of v. But the fact 
that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that varia- 
tion, are obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of 
the increase in the variable component of the capital, there is 
also an increase in the sum total of the advanced capital. It was 
originally £500 and becomes £590. Therefore in order that our in- 
vestigation may lead to accurate results, we must make abstrac- 
tion from that portion of the value of the product, in which con- 
stant capital alone appears, and consequently must equate the 
constant capital to zero or make c=0. This is merely an appli- 
cation of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate 
with constant and variable magnitudes, related to each other by 
the symbols of addition and subtraction only. 

A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the 
variable capital. In our example, C =£410 const. +£90 var.-f £90 
surpl.; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant quantity; 
hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. But in fact, the 
term £90 var. is here merely a symbol to show that this value un- 
dergoes a process. The portion of the capital invested in the pur- 
chase of labour-power is a definite quantity of materialised labour, 
a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. 
But in the process of production the place of the £90 is taken by 
the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced by living la- 
bour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a 
variable. The result is the reproduction of v plus an increment 
of v. From the point of view then of capitalist production, the 
whole process appears as the spontaneous variation of the origi- 
nally constant value, which is transformed into labour-power. 
Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value. 
If, therefore, such expressions as "£90 variable capital," or "so 
much self-expanding value," appear contradictory, this is only be- 
cause they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in 
capitalist production. 



THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 215 

At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the 
constant capital to zero. Yet it is what we do every day. If, for 
example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's profits 
from the cotton industry, we first of all deduct the sums paid 
for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other countries; 
in other words, the value of the capital that merely re-appears 
in the value of the product, is put =0. 

Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion 
of the capital from which it immediately springs, and whose 
change of value it represents, but also to the sum total of the 
capital advanced is economically of very great importance. 
We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio ex- 
haustively. In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand 
its value by being converted into labour-power, it is necessary 
that another portion be converted into means of production. 
In order that variable capital may perform its function, constant 
capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a proportion 
given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process. 
The circumstance, however, that retorts and other vessels, are nec- 
essary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to no- 
tice them in the result of lys analysis. If we look at the means of 
production, in their relation to the creation of value, and to the 
variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they 
appear simply as the material in which labour-power, the value- 
creator, incorporates itself. Neither the nature, nor the value of 
this material is of any importance. The only requisite is that there 
be a sufficient supply to absorb the labour expended in the process 
of production. That supply once given, the material may rise or 
fall in value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value 
in itself; but this will have no influence on the creation of value 
or on the variation in the quantity of value. * 

In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. 
The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c-fv to v, 
and instead of the value of the product (c+v)+s we have now 
the value produced (v-j-s). Given the new value produced = 
£180, which sum consequently represents the whole labour ex- 
pended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the val- 
ue of the variable capital, we have remaining £90, the amount 
of the surplus-value. This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute 



1 What Lucretius says is self-evident; "nil posse creari de nihilo," 
out of nothing, nothing can be created. Creation of value is transformation 
of labour-power into labour. Labour-power itself is energy transferred to 
a human organism by means of nourishing matter. 



216 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

quantity of surplus-value produced. The relative quantity pro- 
duced, or the increase per cent of the variable capital, is deter- 
mined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable 

s 90 

capital, or is expressed by — . In our example this ratio is ^, which 

gives an increase of 100%. This relative increase in the value of 
the variable' capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus- 
value, I call, "The rate of surplus-value." 1 

We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the 
labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, 
that is, the value of his means of subsistence. Now since his 
work forms part of a system, based on the social division of 
labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries which 
he himself consumes; he produces instead a particular commod- 
ity, yarn for example, whose value is equal to the value of those 
necessaries or of the money with which they can be bought. The 
portion of his day's labour devoted to this purpose, will be 
greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries that he 
daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same thing, 
in proportion to the labour-time required on an average to produce 
them. If the value of those necessaries represent on an average 
the expenditure of six hours' labour," the workman must on an 
average work for six hours to produce that value. If instead of 
working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own 
account, he would, other things being equal, still be obliged to 
labour for the same number of hours, in order to produce the val- 
ue of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of sub- 
sistence necessary for his conservation or continued reproduction. 
But as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in 
which he produces the value of his labour-power, say three shil- 
lings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his labour- 
power already advanced 2 by the capitalist; the new value created 
only replaces the variable capital advanced. It is owing to this 
fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings 
takes the semblance of a mere reproduction. That portion of the 
working-day, then, during which this reproduction takes place, 



1 In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate 
of interest." We shall see, in Book III., that the rate of profit is no mystery, 
so soon as we know the laws of surplus-value. If we reverse the process, we 
cannot comprehend either the one or the other. 

2 [Note added in the 3rd German edition.— The author resorts here 
to the economic language in current use. It will be remembered that on p. 
182 (present edition, p. 174) it was shown that in reality the labourer "ad- 
vances" to the capitalist and not the capitalist to the labourer.—/ 1 . E.) 



THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 217 

I call "necessary" labour-time, and the labour expended during 
that time I call "necessary" labour. x Necessary, as regards the la- 
bourer, because independent of the particular social form of his 
labour; necessary, as regards capital, and the world of capital- 
ists, because on the continued existence of the labourer depends 
their existence also. 

During the second period of the labour-process, that in 
which his labour is no longer necessary labour, the workman, 
it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being 
no longer necessary labour, he creates no value for himself. He 
creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms 
of a creation out of nothing. This portion of the working-day, 
I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour expended during 
that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. It is every bit as 
important, for a correct understanding of surplus-value, to conceive 
it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as nothing but 
materialised surplus-labour, as it is, for a proper comprehension 
of value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of so many hours 
of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. The essential 
difference between the various economic forms of society, between, 
for instance, a society based on slave-labour, and one based on 
wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus-labour is 
in each case extracted from the actual producer, the labourer. 2 

Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital 
and of the labour-power purchased by that capital are equal, 
and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary 
portion of the working-day; and since, on the other hand, the 



1 In this work, we have, up to now, employed the term "necessary 
labour-time," to designate the time necessary under given social conditions 
for the production of any commodity. Henceforward we use it to designate 
also the time necessary for the production of the particular commodity la- 
bour-power. The use of one and the same technical term in different senses 
is inconvenient, but in no science can it be altogether avoided. Compare, 
for instance, the higher with the lower branches of mathematics. 

2 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. He has 
made the important discovery that if, on the one hand, the formation of 
surplus-value, or surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation of cap- 
ital, is now-a-days due to the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in 
the lowest stages of civilisation it is the strong who compel the weak to econ- 
omise. (1. c, p. 78.) To economise what? Labour? Or superfluous wealth 
that does not exist? What is it that makes such men as Roscher account 
for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the more or less plau- 
sible excuses by the capitalist, for his appropriation of surplus-value? It 
is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a scientific analysis 
of value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether 
palatable to the powers that be. 



218 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

surplus-value is determined by the surplus portion of the work- 
ing-day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio to 
variable capital, that surplus-labour does to necessary labour, or 

in other words, the rate of surplus-value -= surplus " la 1 b ? ur . 
u . w f . s , surplus-labour v u necessary labour 

Both ratios, - and Dece * sary lab(mr , express the same thing in 

different ways; in the one case by reference to materialised, incor- 
porated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour. 

The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression 
for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of 
the labourer by the capitalist. 1 

We assumed in our example, that the value of the product 
=£410 const. +£90 var. +£90 surpl., and that the capital ad- 
vanced =£500. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the advanced 
capital = £500, we should, according to the usual way of reckoning, 
get as the rate of surplus-value (generally confounded with rate 
of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant sur- 
prise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers. But in truth, the rate 

of surplus-value is not equal to =r or —r— but to — : thus it is not 

90 90 G c + v v 

£qq but 5q or 100% , which is more than five times the apparent de- 
gree of exploitation. Although, in the case we have supposed, we are 
ignorant of the actual length of the working-day, and of the dura- 
tion in days or weeks of the labour-process, as also of the number of 

labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value— accurately dis- 

! i n .. . . . surplus-labour 
closes to us, by means of its equivalent expression, - r-v — 

J ^ r ' necessary labour 

the relation between the two parts of the working-day. This 
relation is here one of equality, the rate being 100%. Hence, 
it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the 
day for himself, the other half for the capitalist. 

The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is there- 
fore, shortly, as follows. We take the total value of the product 
and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, 
equal to zero. What remains, is the only value that has, in the 
process of producing the commodity, been actually created. If 

1 Although the rate of surplus-value is an exact expression for the de- 
gree of exploitation of labour-power, it is, in no sense, an expression for 
the absolute amount of exploitation. For example, if the necessary la- 
bour==5 hours and the surplus-labour=5 hours, the degree of exploitation 
is 100%. The amount of exploitation is here measured by 5 hours. If, on the 
other hand, the necessary labour=6 hours and the surplus-labour=6 hours, 
the degree of exploitation remains, as before, 100% , while the actual amount 
of exploitation has increased 20%, namely from five hours to six. 



THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 219 

the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct 
it from this remainder, to find the variable capital. And vice 
versa, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus- 
value. If both be given, we have only to perform the conclud- 
ing operation, viz., to calculate — , the ratio of the surplus-value 
to the variable capital. 

Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by 
means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the applica- 
tion of the novel principles underlying it. 

First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 
10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from American 
cotton, and producing 1 lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We 
assume the waste to be 6%: under these circumstances 10,600 

lbs. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lbs. go to 

3 
waste. The price of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7-r- d. per. lb.; the 

raw material therefore costs in round numbers £342. The 10,000 
spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power, 
cost, we will assume, £1 per spindle, amounting to a total 
of £10,000. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or £1,000 yeary= 
£20 weekly. The rent of the building we suppose to be £300 a year, 
or £6 a week. Goal consumed (for 100 horse-power indicated, at 
4 lbs. of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and in- 
clusive of that consumed in heating the mill), 11 tons a week at 8s. 

A 

6d. a ton, amounts to about £4y a week: gas, £1 a week, oil, &amp;c, 
£4^- a week. Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 week- 
ly. Therefore the constant portion of the value of the week's product 
is £378. Wages amount to £52 a week. The price of the yarn is 

12-^- d. per lb. which gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. the sum of 

£510.The surplus-value is therefore in this case £510— £430 =£80. 
We put the constant part of the value of the product =0, as it plays 
no part in the creation of value. There remains £132 as the 
weekly value created, which =£52 var.+£80surpl.The rate of sur- 
plus-value is therefore ^=153^%. In a working-day of 10 hours 
with average labour the result is: necessary labour =3^ hours, 
and surplus-labour =6^. x 

1 The above data, which may be relied upon, were given me by a Man- 
chester spinner. In England the horse-power of an engine was formerly cal- 
culated from the diameter of its cylinder, now the actual horse-power shown 
hv the indicator is taken. 



220 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for 
the year 1815. Owing to the previous adjustment of several items 
it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. 
In it he assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. a quarter, and the 
average yield per acre to be 22 bushels. 

VALUE PRODUCED PER ACRE 



Seed, £1 90 

Manure, 2 10 

Wages, 3 10 



Total, ... £7 90 



Tithes, Rates, and Taxes, £1 1 

Rent 18 

Farmer's Profit and In- 
terest 12 

Total, £ 3 11 



Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its 
value, we here find the surplus-value distributed under the va- 
rious heads of profit, interest, rent, &amp;c. We have nothing to do 
with these in detail; we simply add them together, and the sum 
is a surplus-value of £3 lis. Od. The sum of £3 19 s. Od., paid 
for seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it equal to 
zero. There is left the sum of £3 10s. Od., which is the variable 
capital advanced: and we see that a new value of £3 10s. Od.-r£3 

lis. Od. has been produced in its place. Therefore -7= go jq*' qa 

giving a rate of surplus-value of more than 100%. The labourer 
employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the 
surplus-value, which different persons, under different pretexts, 
share amongst themselves. * 



SECTION 2.— THE REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS 

OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT 

BY CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS 

OF THE PRODUCT ITSELF 

Let us now return to the example by which we were shown 
how the capitalist converts money into capital. 

The product of a working-day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. of yarn, 

o 

having a value of 30s. No less than -^ ths of this value, or 24s., 



1 The calculations given in the text are intended merely as illustra- 
tions. We have in fact assumed that prices=values. We shall, however, see, 
in Book III., that even in the case of average prices the assumption cannot 
he made in this very simple manner. 



THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 221 

is due to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of 
production (20 ibs. of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 

4s.): it is therefore constant capital. The remaining T^ths or 

6s. is the new value created during the spinning process: of 
this one half replaces the value of the day's labour-power, or the 
variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus-value 
of 3s. The total value then of the 20 lbs. of yarn is made up as fol- 
lows: 

30s. value of yarn=24s. const. -{-3s. var.-|-3s. surpl. 

Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. of 
yarn produced, it follows that the various component parts of 
this value, can be represented as being contained respectively 
in corresponding parts of the product. 

o 

If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 ibs. of yarn, then t^ ths 
of this value, or the 24s. that form its constant part, is COn- 
tained in i^ths of the product or in 16 lbs. of yarn. Of the lat- 

ter 13-^- lbs. represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. 

2 
worth of cotton spun, and 2-~- lbs. represent the 4s. worth of spin- 
dle, &amp;c, worn away in the process. 

Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 

lbs. of yarn, is represented by 13 -^ lbs. of yarn. This latter weight 

l 
of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13-^- lbs. of 

1 2 

cotton, worth 13^- shillings; but the 6-~- shillings additional value 

contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton consumed in 

2 
spinning the remaining 6-5- lbs. of yarn. The effect is the same as 

2 
if these 6-^- lbs. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and the whole 

\ 
20 lbs. of cotton were concentrated in the 13-y lbs. of yarn. The 

latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either 
of the value of the auxiliary materials and implements, or of the 
value newly created in the process. 

In the same way, the 2-^ lbs. of yarn, in which the 4s., the re- 
mainder of the constant capital, is embodied, represents nothing 
but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour 
consumed in producing the 20 lbs, of yarn, 



222 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight- 
tenths of the product, or 16 lbs. of yarn, is, in its character of 
an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's 
labour, as the remainder of the same product, yet when viewed 
in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed 
any labour expended during the process of spinning. It is just 
as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without help; 
as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: 
for so soon as our capitalist sells it for 24s., and with the money 
replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 
16 lbs. of yarn is nothing more than so much cotton and spindle- 
waste in disguise. 2 

On the other hand, the remaining r^ths of the product, or 4 

lbs. of yarn, represent nothing but the new value of 6s., created 
during the 12 hours' spinning process. All the value trans- 
ferred to those 4 lbs., from the raw material and instruments of 
labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be incor- 
porated in the 16 lbs. first spun. In this case, it is as if the spinner 
had spun 4 lbs. of yarn out of air, or, as if he had spun them with 
the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the spontaneous gift 
of Nature, transferred no value to the product. 

Of this 4 lbs. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly 
created during the process, is condensed, one half represents the 
equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. variable 
capital, the other half represents the 3s. surplus-value. 

Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., 
it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s., there must be em- 
bodied 60 working-hours. And this quantity of labour-time 

o 

does in fact exist in the 20 lbs. of yarn; for in i^ths or 16 lbs. 

there are materialised the 48 hours of labour expended, before 

the commencement of the spinning process, on the means of 

2 
production; and in the remaining Tnths or 4 lbs. there are mate- 
rialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself. 

On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal 
to the sum of the new value created during the production of that 
yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of produc- 
tion. 

It has now been shown how the various component parts of 
the value of the product, parts that differ functionally from each 
other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts 
of the product itself. 



THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 223 

To split up in this manner the product into different parts, 
of which one represents only the labour previously spent on 
the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only 
the necessary labour spent during the process of production, or 
the variable capital, and another and last part, only the surplus- 
labour expended during the same process, or the surplus-value; 
to do this, is, as will be seen later on from its application to 
complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less important 
than it is simple. 

In the preceding investigation we have treated the total 
product as the final result, ready for use, of a working-day of 
12 hours. We can however follow this total product through 
all the stages of its production; and in this way we shall arrive 
at the same result as before, if we represent the partial products, 
given off at the different stages, as functionally different parts of 
the final or total product. 

The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. of yarn, or in 1 

2 2 

hour 1-x- lbs.; consequently he produces in 8 hours 13 -~- lbs., 

or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun 

in a whole day. In like manner the partial product of the next 

2 
period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2 -5- lbs. of yarn: this represents 

the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 
hours. In the following hour and 12 minutes, the spinner produces 
2 lbs. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value equal to the whole value 
he creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour. Finally, in the last 
hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2 lbs. of yarn, whose 
value is equal to the surplus-value, created by his surplus-labour 
during half a day. This method of calculation serves the English 
manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that in the 

9 

first 8 hours, or -« of the working-day, he gets back the value of 

his cotton; and so on for the remaining hours. It is also a perfectly 
correct method: being in fact the first method given above with 
this difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which 
the different parts of the completed product lie side by side, it 
deals with time, in which those parts are successively produced. 
But it can also be accompanied by very barbarian notions, more 
especially in the heads of those who are as much interested, prac- 
tically, in the process of making value beget value, as they are 
in misunderstanding that process theoretically. Such people may 
get the notion into their heads, that our spinner, for example 



224 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of his working-day the value 
of the cotton; in the following hour and 36 minutes the value of 
the instruments of labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 min- 
utes the value of the wages; and that he devotes to the production 
of surplus-value for the manufacturer, only that well known "last 
hour." In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold 
miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, 
coal, oil, &amp;c, at the same time that he spins with them, but 
also of turning one working-day into five; for, in the example 
we are considering, the production of the raw material and in- 
struments of labour demands four working-days of twelve hours 
each, and their conversion into yarn requires another such day. 
That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such miracles, 
and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove 
them, is vouched for by the following incident of historical ce- 
lebrity. 

SECTION 3.— SENIOR'S "LAST HOUR" 

One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who 
may be called the bel-esprit of English economists, well known, 
alike for his economic "science," and for his beautiful style, 
was summoned from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the 
latter place, the Political Economy that he taught in the former. 
The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only 
against the newly passed Factory Act, but against the still more 
menacing Ten-hours' agitation. With their usual practical acute- 
ness, they had found out that the learned Professor "wanted 
a good deal of finishing;" it was this discovery that caused them 
to write for him. On his side the Professor has embodied the lec- 
ture he received from the Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, 
entitled: "Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton 
manufacture." London, 1837. Here we find, amongst others, the 
following edifying passage: "Under the present law, no mill in 
which persons under 18 years of age are employed, ... can be 

worked more than 11 y hours a day, that is, 12 hours for 5 days 

in the week, and nine on Saturday. 

"Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so 
worked, the whole net profit is derived from the last hour. I will 
suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000:— £80,000 in his 
mill and machinery, and £20,000 in raw material and wages. The 
annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once 
-a year, and gross profits to be 15 percent., ought to be goods worth 



THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 225 

£115,000.... Of this £115,000, each of the twenty-three half- 
hours of work produces 5-U5ths or one twenty-third. Of these 23- 
23rds (constituting the whole £115,000) twenty, that is to say 
£100,000 out of the £115,000, simply replace the capital;— one 
twenty-third (or £5,000 out of the £115,000) makes up for the de- 
terioration of the mill and machinery. The remaining 2-23rds, 
that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day, 
produce the net profit of 10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining 
the same), the factory could be kept at work thirteen hours in- 
stead of eleven and a half, with an addition of about £2,600 to the 
circulating capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. 
On the other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one 
hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be 
destroyed— if they were reduced by one hour and a half, even 
the gross profit would be destroyed." 1 

And the professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving cre- 
dence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that 
the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, 
i.e., the reproduction or replacement of the value of the build- 
ings, machinery, cotton, coal, &amp;c, then his analysis was super- 
fluous. His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen! 

1 Senior, 1. c, pp. 12, 13. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are 
of no importance for our purpose; for instance, the assertion, that manufac- 
turers reckon as part of their profit, gross or net, the amount required to 
make good wear and tear of machinery, or in other words, to replace a part 
of the capital. So, too, we pass over any question as to the accuracy of his 
figures. Leonard Horner has shown in "A Letter to Mr. Senior," &amp;c, London, 
1837, that they are worth no more than the so-called "Analysis." Leonard 
Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners in 1833, and Inspec- 
tor, or rather Censor of Factories till 1859. He rendered undying service to 
the English working-class. He carried on a life-long contest, not only with 
the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the number 
of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater 
importance than the number of hours worked by the "hands" in the mills. 

Apart from errors in principle, Senior's statement is confused. What he 
really intended to say was this: The manufacturer employs the workman 
for 11 l l 2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. As the working-day, so, too, the 
working year, may be conceived to consist of ll 1 / 2 hours or 23 half-hours, 
but each multiplied by the number of working-days in the year. On this sup- 
position, the 23 half-hours yield an annual product of £1 15,000; one half- 
hour yields 1/23X^115,000; 20 half-hours yield 20/23x^115,000=^100,000, 
i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. There remain 3 half- 
hours, which yield 3/23X^1 15,000=^15,000 or the gross profit. Of these 
3 half-hours, one yields 1/23X^H5,000=«£5,000; i.e., it makes up for the 
wear and tear of the machinery; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last 
hour, yield 2/23 X&lt;£1 15,000=^10,000 or the net profit. In the text Senior 
converts the last 2/23 of the product into portions of the working-day itself. 



226 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

\ 

if you work your mills for 10 hours instead of ll-y, then, other 

things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, 
&amp;c, will decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as you 
lose. Your workpeople will in future spend one hour and a half 
less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been 
advanced.— If, on the other hand, he did not believe them with- 
out further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters, 
deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that 
is concerned exclusively with the relations of net profit to the 
length of the working-day, before all things to have asked the 
manufacturers, to be careful not to lump together machinery, 
workshops, raw material, and labour, but to be good enough 
to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, 
raw material, &amp;c, on one side of the account, and the capital ad- 
vanced in wages on the other side. If the professor then found, 
that in accordance with the calculation of the manufacturers, 
the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in 2 half-hours, 
in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus: 

According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but 
one produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus-value 
or net profit. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal val- 
ues, the produce of the last hour but one, must have the same 
value as that of the last hour. Further, it is only while he labours 
that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour 

is measured by his labour-time. This you say, amounts to lly 
hours a day. He employs one portion of these lly hours, in produc- 
ing or replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in produc- 
ing your net profit. Beyond this he does absolutely nothing. 
But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the surplus-value 
he yields, are of equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages 

3 3 

in 5-7- hours, and your net profit in the other 5^- hours. Again, 

since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum 
of the values of his wages and of your net profit, the measure of the 

1 3 

value of this yarn must be 11-^- working-hours, of which 5-t- hours 

measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, 

3 
and 5-t- , the value of the yarn produced in the last hour. We now 

come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last working- 
hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither 



THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 227 

more nor less. How then can the spinner produce in one hour&gt; 

in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5^- hours' labour? 

The truth is that he performs no such miracle. The use-value pro- 
duced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of yarn. The val- 

3 3 

ue of this yarn is measured by 5^- working-hours, of which 4^- were, 

without any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means 
of production, in the cotton, the machinery, and so on; the remain- 
ing one hour alone is added by him. Therefore since his wages 

3 
are produced in 5^- hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also 

3 
contains 5y hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the result, that 

3 
the value created by his 5-r- hours' spinning, is equal to the value of 

the product spun in one hour. You are altogether on the wrong 
track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his working- 
day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the 
machinery, and so on. On the contrary, it is because his labour 
converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that 
the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their 
own accord. This result is owing to the quality of his labour, 
not to its quantity. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the 
yarn more value, in the shape of cotton, than he will in half an 
hour; but that is only because in one hour he spins up more cot- 
ton than in half an hour. You see then, your assertion, that the 
workman produces, in the last hour but one, the value of his 
wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more 
than this, that in the yarn produced by him in 2 working-hours, 
whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the working-day, 

in that yarn, there are incorporated 11 y working-hours, or just a 

whole day's work, i.e., two hours of his own work and 9y hours 

- 3 
of other people's. And my assertion that, in the first 5^- hours, 

3 
he produces his wages, and in the last 5^- hours your net profit, 

amounts only to this, that you pay him for the former, but not 
for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of pay- 
ment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang. Now, gen- 
tlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay for, with that 
which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one an- 
other, as half a day is to half a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and 



228 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a very pretty percentage it is. Further, there is not the least doubt, 

that if you make your "hands" toil for 13 hours, instead of lly, 

and, as may be expected from you, treat the work done in that 
extra one hour and a half, as pure surplus-labour, then the latter 

3 1 

will be increased from 5— hours' labour to 7-y- hours' labour, and 

4 4 
2 

the rate of surplus-value from 100% to 12620%. So that you are 

altogether too sanguine, in expecting that by such an addition 

of I-5- hours to the working-day, the rate will rise from 100% to 

200% and more, in other words that it will be "more than dou- 
bled." On the other hand— man's heart is a wonderful thing, 
especially when carried in the purse— you take too pessimist 
a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of la- 

bour from 11— to 10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. 

Not at all. All other conditions remaining the same, the surplus- 

3 3 

labour will fall from 5 -7- hours to 4 — hours, a period that still 

14 
gives a very profitable rate of surplus-value, namely 82-^-%. 

But this dreadful "last hour," about which you have invented 
more stories than have the millenarians about the day of judg- 
ment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither you, your net 
profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their "purity 
of mind." 1 Whenever your "last hour" strikes in earnest, think 



1 If, on the one hand, Senior proved that the net profit of the manufac- 
turer, the existence of the English cotton industry, and England's command 
of the markets of the world, depend on "the last working-hour," on the other 
hand, Dr. Andrew Ure showed, that if children and young persons under 
18 years of age, instead of being kept the full 12 hours in the warm and pure 
moral atmosphere of the factory, are turned out an hour sooner into the 
heartless and frivolous outer world, they will be deprived, by idleness and 
vice, of all hope of salvation for their souls. Since 1848, the factory inspec- 
tors have never tired of twitting the masters with this "last," this "fatal 
hour." Thus Mr. Hovell in his report of the 21st May, 1855: "Had the follow- 
ing ingenious calculation (he quotes Senior) been correct, every cotton fac- 
tory in the United Kingdom would have been working at a loss since the 
year 1850." (Reports of the Insp. of Fact, lor the hall-year, ending 30th 
April, 1855, pp. 19, 20.) In the year 1848, after the passing of the 10 hours' 
bill, the masters of some flax spinning mills, scattered, few and far between, 
over the country on the borders of Dorset and Somerset, foisted a petition 
against the bill on to the shoulders of a few of their workpeople. One of 
the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, as parents, con- 
ceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise the chil- 



THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 229 

of the Oxford Professor. And now, gentlemen, "farewell, and may 
we meet again in yonder better world, but not before." 

Senior invented the battle cry of the "last hour" in 1836. l 
In the London Economist of the 15th April, 1848, the same cry 
was again raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of 
high standing: this time in opposition to the 10 hours' bill. 



dren than otherwise, believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this 
the factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says: The atmosphere of the flax mills, 
in which the children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded 
with dust and fibre from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleas- 
ant to stand even 10 minutes in the spinning rooms: for you are unable to 
do so without the most painful sensation, owing to the eyes, the ears, the 
nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by the clouds of flax dust from 
which there is no escape. The labour itself, owing to the feverish haste of 
the machinery, demands unceasing application of skill and movement, under 
the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, 
to let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allow- 
ing for meal-times, are fettered for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, 
in such an atmosphere.... These children work longer than the labourers in 
the neighbouring villages.... Such cruel talk about "idleness and vice" ought 
to be branded as the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy.... That 
portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago, were struck by the assurance 
with which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most 
earnestly proclaimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows 
from the labour of the last hour, and that, therefore, the reduction of the 
working-day by one hour, would destroy his net profit, that portion of the 
public, we say, will hardly believe its own eyes, when it now finds, that the 
original discovery of the virtues of "the last hour" has since been so far im- 
proved, as to include morals as well as profit; so that, if the duration of the 
labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, together with 
the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on this 
last, this fatal hour. (See Repts., Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. 101.) 
The same report then gives some examples of the morality and virtue of these 
same pure-minded manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, 
the threats, and the falsifications, they made use of, in order, first, to compel 
a few defenceless workmen to sign petitions of such a kind, and then to impose 
them upon Parliament as the petitions of a whole branch of industry, 
or a whole country. It is highly characteristic of the present status of so-called 
economic science, that neither Senior himself, who, at a later period, to 
his honour be it said, energetically supported the factory legislation, nor 
his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the false 
conclusions of the "original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, 
but the why and wherefore remains a mystery. 

1 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit 
from his journey to Manchester. In the "Letters on the Factory Act," he 
makes the whole net gains including "profit" and "interest," and even "some- 
thing more," depend upon a single unpaid hour's work of the labourer. One 
year'previously, in his "Outlines of Political Economy," written for the in- 
struction of Oxford students and cultivated Philistines, he had also "dis- 
covered, in opposition to Ricardo's determination of value by labour, that 



230 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 4.— SURPLUS-PRODUCE 

The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, 
(one-tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. of yarn, in the example given 
in Sec. 2 ) we call "surplus-produce." Just as the rate of surplus- 
value is determined by its relation, not to the sum total of the 
capital, but to its variable part; in like manner, the relative quan- 
tity of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this prod- 
uce bears, not to the remaining part of the total product, but to 
that part of it in which is incorporated the necessary labour. 
Since the production of surplus-value is the chief end and aim 
of capitalist production, it is clear, that the greatness of a man's 
or a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute 
quantity produced, but by the relative magnitude of the surplus- 
produce. x 

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., 
of the periods of time during which the workman replaces the 
value of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this 
sum constitutes the actual time during which he works, i.e., the 
working-day. 



profit is derived from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from his 
asceticism, in other words, from his "abstinence." The dodge was an old one, 
but the word "abstinence" was new. Herr Roscher translates it rightly by 
"Enthaltung." Some of his countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, 
of Germany, not so well versed in Latin as he, have, monk-like, rendered it 
by "Entsagung" (renunciation). 

1 "To an individual with a capital of £20,000, whose profits were 
£2,000 per annum, it would be a matter quite indifferent whether his capital 
would employ a 100 or 1,000 men, whether the commodity produced sold 
for £10,000 or £20,000, provided, in all cases, his profit were not diminished 
below £2,000. Is not the real interest of the nation similar? Provided its net 
real income, its rent and profits, be the same, it is of no importance whether 
the nation consists of 10 or of 12 millions of inhabitants." (Ric. 1. c, p. 
416.) Long before Ricardo, Arthur Young, a fanatical upholder of surplus- 
produce, for the rest, a rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in 
the inverse ratio of his merit, says, "Of what use, in a modern kingdom, 
would be a whole province thus divided [in the old Roman manner, by 
small independent peasants], however well cultivated, except for the mere 
purpose of breeding men, which taken singly is a most useless purpose?" 
(Arthur Young: "Political Arithmetic, &amp;c." London, 1774, p. 47.) 

Very curious is "the strong inclination ... to represent net wealth as 
beneficial to the labouring class ... though it is evidently not on account of 
being net." (Th. Hopkins, "On Rent of Land, &amp;c." London, 1828, p. 126.) 



231 



CH APTER X 

THE WORKING-DAY 

SECTION 1.— THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING-DAY 

We started with the supposition that Labour-power is bought 
and sold at its value. Its value, like that of all other commod- 
ities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its pro- 
duction. If the production of the average daily means of sub- 
sistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, on the 
average, 6 hours every day, to produce his daily labour-power, 
or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. The 
necessary part of his working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, there- 
fore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. But with this, the extent 
of the working-day itself is not yet given. 

Let us assume that the line A B represents the length of the 
necessary working-time, say 6 hours. If the labour be prolonged 
1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A B, we have 3 other lines: 

Working-day I. Working-day II. Working-day III. 
A - B -G. A - B — G. A B G. 

representing 3 different working-days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. 
The extension B G of the line A B represents the length of the 
surplus-labour. As the working-day is A B + B C or A C, it varies 
with the variable quantity B C. Since A B is constant, the ratio 

of BCto A B can always be calculated. In working-day I, it is -^-, 
in working-day 11, -g-, in working-day III, -g- of A B. Since, further, 

the ratio surplus working-time, determines the rate of the surplus, 

necessary working-time, 
value, the latter is given by the ratio of B G to A B. It amounts 

in the 3 different working-days respectively to 16j, 50 and 100 per 



232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

cent. On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value alone would not 
give us the extent of the working-day. If this rate, e.g., were 100 per 
cent., the working-day might be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. 
It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working- 
day, necessary-labour and surplus-labour time, were equal in ex- 
tent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was. 

The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable 
quantity. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the work- 
ing-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of 
the labourer himself. But its total amount varies with the du- 
ration of the surplus-labour. The working-day is, therefore, deter- 
minable, but is, per se, indeterminate. x 

Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quan- 
tity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain limits. 
The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we 
make the extension line B G or the surplus-labour =0, we have 
a minimum limit, i.e., the part of the day which the labourer 
must necessarily work for his own maintenance. On the basis of 
capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a 
part only of the working-day; the working-day itself can never be 
reduced to this minimum. On the other hand, the working-day 
has a maximum limit. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain 
point. This maximum limit is conditioned by two things. First, 
by the physical bounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of 
the natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his 
vital force. A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to 
day, 8 hours. During part of the day this force must rest, sleep; 
during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to 
feed, wash, and clothe himself. Besides these purely physical 
limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral 
ones. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and 
social wants, the extent and number of which are conditioned by 
the general state of social advancement. The variation of the work- 
ing-day fluctuates, therefore, within physical and social bounds. 
But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, 
and allow the greatest latitude. So we find working-days of 8, 
10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths. 

The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. 
To him its use-value belongs during one working-day. He has 



1 "A day's labour is vague, it may be long or short." ("An Essay on 
Trade and Commerce, Containing Observations on Taxes, &amp;c." London, 1770. 
p. 73.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 233 



thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during 
one day. But, what is a working-day? 1 

At all events, less than a natural day. By how much? The 
capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the necessary 
limit of the working-day. As capitalist, he is only capital person- 
ified. His soul is the soul of capital. But capital has one single 
life impulse, the tendency to create value and, surplus-value, to 
make its constant factor, the means of production, absorb the great- 
est possible amount of surplus-labour. 2 

Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by 
sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it 
sucks. The time during which the labourer works, is the time 
during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power he has 
purchased of him. 3 

If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he 
robs the capitalist. 4 

The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the ex- 
change of commodities. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get 
the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commod- 
ity. Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had been stifled 
in the storm and stress of the process of production, rises: 

The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the 
crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value, and 
a value greater than its own. That is why you bought it. That 
which on your side appears a spontaneous expansion of capital, 
is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. You and I know 
on the market only one law, that of the exchange of com- 
modities. And the consumption of the commodity belongs 
not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, who 



1 This question is far more important than the celebrated question of 
Sir Robert Peel to the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce: What is a pound? A 
question that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in 
the dark as to the nature of money as the "little shilling men" of Birmingham. 

2 "It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the 
greatest possible quantity of labour (d'obtenir du capital depense la plus 
Forte somme de travail possible)." J. G. Courcelle-Seneuil. "Traite theonque 
et pratique des entreprises industrielles." 2nd ed. Paris, 1857, p. 63. 

3 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commer- 
cial State.... There is a very great consumption of luxuries among the labour- 
ing poor of this kingdom: particularly among the manufacturing populace, 
by which they also consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions." 
"An Essay on Trade and Commerce, &amp;c," p. 47, and 153. 

4 "Si le manouvrier libre prend un instant de repos, Peconomie sordide 
qui le suit des yeux avec inquietude, pretend qu'il la vole." N. Linguet, 
"Theorie des Lois Civiles, &amp;c." London, 1767, t. II., p. 466. 



234 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

acquires it. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour- 
power. But by means of the price that you pay for it each day, 
I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. Apart 
from natural exhaustion through age, &amp;c, I must be able on the 
morrow to work with the same normal amount of force, health 
and freshness as to-day. You preach to me constantly the gospel 
of "saving" and "abstinence." Good! I will, like a sensible saving 
owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from 
all foolish waste of it. I will each day spend, set in motion, put 
into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal 
duration, and healthy development. By an unlimited extension of 
the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour- 
power greater than I can restore in three. What you gain in la- 
bour I lose in substance. The use of my labour-power and the spo- 
liation of it are quite different things. If the average time that 
(doing a reasonable amount of work) an average labourer can live, 
is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from 

1 1 

day to day is 5 ~ Q or , Q of its total value. But if you consume 

1 1 

it in 10 years, you pay me daily 1Q95Q instead of^^-of its total 

value, i.e., only -^ of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, 

2 
every day of -^ of the value of my commodity. You pay me for one 

day's labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days. That is against 
our contract and the law of exchanges. I demand, therefore, a work- 
ing-day of normal length, and I demand it without any appeal to 
your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. You 
may be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity 
to boot; but the thing that you represent face to face with me has 
no heart in its breast. That which seems to throb there is my own 
heart-beating. I demand the normal working-day because I, like 
every other seller, demand the value of my commodity. 1 

We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the 
nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to 
the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour. The capitalist main- 



1 During the great strike of the London builders, 1860-61, for the 
reduction of the working-day to 9 hours, their Committee published a mani- 
festo that contained, to some extent, the plea of our worker. The manifesto 
alludes, not without irony, to the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst 
the building masters, a certain Sir M. Peto, was in ttie odour of sanctity. 
(This same Peto, after 1867, came to an end a la Strousberg.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 235 



tains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the work- 
ing-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two 
working-days out of one. On the other hand, the peculiar nature 
of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by the 
purchaser, and the labourer maintains his right as seller when he 
wishes to reduce the working-day to one of definite normal dura- 
tion. There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, 
both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges. Between 
equal rights force decides. Hence is it that in the history of capi- 
talist production, the determination of what is a working-day, 
presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between col- 
lective capital, i.e., the class of capitalists, and collective labour, 
i.e., the working-class. 

SECTION 2.— THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. 
MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD 

Capital has not invented surplus-labour. Wherever a part 
of society possesses the monopoly of the means of production, the 
labourer, free or not free, must add to the working-time necessa- 
ry for his own maintenance an extra working-time in order to pro- 
duce the means of subsistence for the owners of the means of pro- 
duction, 1 whether this proprietor be the Athenian xaXo; xayaOos, 
Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, American 
slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. 2 
It is, however, clear that in any given economic formation of so- 
ciety, where not the exchange-value but the use-value of the prod- 
uct predominates, surplus-labour will be limited by a given set 
of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless 
thirst for surplus-labour arises from the nature of the production 
itself. Hence in antiquity over-work becomes horrible only when 
the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent 
money-form; in the production of gold and silver. Compulsory 
working to death is here the recognised form of over-work. Only 
read Diodorus Siculus. 3 Still these are exceptions in antiquity. 

1 "Those who labour ... in reality teed both the pensioners ... [called 
the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1. c, p. 2.) 

2 Niebuhr in his "Roman History" says very naively: "It is evident that 
works like the Etruscan, which in their ruins astound us, pre-suppose in 
little (!) states lords and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose 
that "Brussels lace" pre-supposes wage-lords and wage-slaves. 

3 "One cannot see these unfortunates (in the gold mines between Egypt, 
Ethiopia, and Arabia) who cannot even have their bodies clean, or their 
nakedness clothed, without pitying their miserable lot. There is no indul- 
gence, no forbearance for the sick, the feeble, the aged, for woman's weak- 



236 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the 
lower forms of slave-labour, corvee-labour, &amp;c, are drawn into 
the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the capi- 
talistic mode of production, the sale of their products for export 
becoming their principal interest, the civilised horrors of over- 
work are grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &amp;c. 
Hence the negro labour in the Southern States of the American 
Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as 
production was chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. 
But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital inter- 
est to these states, the over-working of the negro and some- 
times the using up of his life in 7 years of labour became a fac- 
tor in a calculated and calculating system. It was no longer 
a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of useful 
products. It was now a question of production of surplus-labour 
itself. So was it also with the corvee, e.g., in the Danubian Prin- 
cipalities (now Roumania). 

The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Da- 
nubian Principalities with the same greed in English factories 
has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has 
an independent and palpable form. 

Suppose the working-day consists of 6 hours of necessary 
labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Then the free labourer 
gives the capitalist every week 6x6 or 36 hours of surplus- 
labour. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in the week for him- 
self, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. But this is 
not evident on the surface. Surplus-labour and necessary labour 
glide one into the other. I can, therefore, express the same rela- 
tionship by saying, e.g., that the labourer in every minute works 
30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, etc. It is other- 
wise with the corvee. The necessary labour which the Wallachian 
peasant does for his own maintenance is distinctly marked off 
from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard. The one he does 
on his own field, the other on the seignorial estate. Both parts of 
the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one 
with the other. In the corvee the surplus-labour is accurately 
marked off from the necessary labour. This, however, can make no 
difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour 
to necessary labour. Three days' surplus-labour in the week remain 
three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, wheth- 



ness. All must, forced by blows, work on until death puts an end to their 
sufferings and their distress." ("Diod. Sic. Bibl. Hist.," lib. 2, c. 13.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 237 



er it be called corvee or wage-labour. But in the capitalist the 
greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlim- 
ited extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply 
in a direct hunting after days of corvee. 1 

In the Danubian Principalities the corvee was mixed up with 
rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed 
the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. Where this 
was the case, the corvee rarely arose from serfdom; serfdom much 
more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvee. 2 
This is what took place in the Roumanian provinces. Their orig- 
inal mode of production was based on community of the soil, 
but not in the Slavonic or Indian form. Part of the land was cul- 
tivated in severalty as freehold by the members of the community, 
another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in com- 
mon. The products of this common labour served partly as a re- 
serve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a 
public store for providing the costs of war, religion, and other 
common expenses. In course of time military and clerical digni- 
taries usurped, along with the common land, the labour spent 
upon it. The labour of the free peasants on their common land was 
transformed into corvee for the thieves of the common land. This 
corvee soon developed into a servile relationship existing in point 
of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, 
made it legal under pretence of abolishing serfdom. The code of 
the corvee, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed 
in 1831, was of course dictated by the Boyards themselves. 
Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Da- 
nubian provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout 
Europe. 

According to the "Reglement organique," as this code of the 
corvee is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the so-called 



1 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian prov- 
inces before the change effected since the Crimean war. 

2 This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east 
of the Elbe. In the 15th century the German peasant was nearly everywhere 
a man, who, whilst subject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was 
otherwise at least practically free. The German colonists in Brandenburg, 
Pomerania, Silesia, and Eastern Prussia, were even legally acknowledged as 
free men. The victory of the nobility in the peasants' war put an end to that. 
Not only were the conquered South German peasants again enslaved. From 
the middle of the 16th century the peasants of Eastern Prussia, Brandenburg, 
Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free peasants of Schleswig- 
Holstein were degraded to the condition of serfs. (Maurer, Fronhofe iv. 
vol.,— Meitzen, "Der Boden des preussischen Staats."— Hanssen, "Leibeigen- 
schaft in Schleswig-Holstein."— F. E.) 



238 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 
days of general labour; (2), one day of field labour; (3), one day 
of wood carrying. In all, 14 days in the year. With deep insight 
into Political Economy, however, the working-day is not taken 
in its ordinary sense, but as the working-day necessary to the pro- 
duction of an average daily product; and that average daily prod- 
uct is determined in so crafty a way that no Cyclops would be 
done with it in 24 hours. In dry words, the Reglement itself de- 
clares with true Russian irony that by 12 working-days one must 
understand the product of the manual labour of 36 days, by 1 
day of field labour 3 days, and by 1 day of wood carrying in like 
manner three times as much. In all, 42 corvee days. To this had 
to be added the so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for ex- 
traordinary occasions. In proportion to the size of its population, 
every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the 
jobagie. This additional corvee is estimated at 14 days for each 
Wallachian peasant. Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 56 
working-days yearly. But the agricultural year in Wallachia num- 
bers in consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 
40 for Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, 
together 70 days, do not count. 140 working-days remain. The 

ratio of the corvee to the necessary labour ^- or 66-r- % gives a much 

smaller rate of surplus-value than that which regulates the la- 
bour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. This is, 
however, only the legally prescribed corvee. And in a spirit yet 
more "liberal" than the English Factory Acts, the "Reglement orga- 
nique" has known how to facilitate its own evasion. After it has 
made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's work of each of the 56 
corvee days is again so arranged that a portion of it must fall on 
the ensuing day. In one day, e.g., must be weeded an extent of 
land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations, needs 
twice as much time. The legal day's work for some kinds of agri- 
cultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins 
in May and ends in October. In Moldavia conditions are still 
harder. "The 12 corvee days of the 'Reglement organique' cried 
a Boyard drunk with victory, amount to 365 days in the year." 1 
If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was 
a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour which every 
paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative 



1 Further details are to be found in E. Regnault^s "Histoire politique 
el sociale des Principautes Danubiennes," Paris, 1855. 



THE WORKING-DAY 239 



expression of the same greed. These acts curb the passion of cap- 
ital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limit* 
ing the working-day by state regulations, made by a state that 
is ruled by capitalist and landlord. Apart from the working-class 
movement that daily grew more threatening, the limiting of 
factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread 
guano over the English fields. The same blind eagerness for plun- 
der that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the other, 
torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. Periodical 
epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the diminishing mil- 
itary standard in Germany and France. 1 

the Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the 
average working-day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days 12 hours 

from 6 a. m. to 6 p. m., including -j an hour for breakfast, and 
an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10 y working-hours, and 
8 hours for Saturday, from 6 a. m. to 2 p. m., of which — an hour 
is subtracted for breakfast. 60 working-hours are left, 10 y for 

each of the first 5 days, 1-j for the last. 2 Certain guardians of 

these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the 
Home Secretary, whose reports are published half-yearly, by 
order of Parliament. They give regular and official statistics of 
the capitalistic greed for surplus-labour. 



1 "In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size 
of their kind, is evidence of the prosperity of organic beings. As to man, 
his bodily height lessens if his due growth is interfered with, either by phys- 
ical or social conditions. In all European countries in which the conscrip- 
tion holds, since its introduction, the medium height of adult men, and 
generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. Before the revo- 
lution (1789), the minimum for the infantry in France was 165 centimetres; 
in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; by the law of March 21, 1832, 156 c. m.; 
on the average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient 
height or bodily weakness. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 
178 c. m. It is now 155. In Prussia it is 157. According to the statement of 
Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian Gazette, May 9th, 1862, the result of an average 
of 9 years is, that in Prussia out of 1,000 conscripts 716 were unfit for 
military service, 317 because of deficiency in height, and 399 because of 
bodily defects.... Berlin in 1858 could not provide its contingent of recruits; 
it was 156 men short." J. von Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf 
Agrikultur und Physiologie, 1862," 7th Ed., vol. I., pp. 117, 118. 

2 The history of the Factory Act of 1850 will be found in the course 
of this chapter. 



240 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors. l 
"The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an hour 
(sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a. m., and leaves off 
a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 
6 p. m. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the 
end of the half hour nominally allowed for breakfast, and 10 
minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allowed 
for dinner. He works for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, 
sometimes less) after 2 p. m. on Saturday. Thus his gain is — 

Belore 6 a. m 15 minutes. 

Alter 6 p. m., 15 

At breakfast time, 10 

At dinner time 20 



Five days— 300 minutes, 60 

On Saturday before 6 a. m., 15 minutes. 

At breakfast time, 10 

After 2 p. m., 15 



40 minutes. 
Total weekly, 340 minutes. 

Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 
working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays and oc- 
casional stoppages) is equal to 27 working-days." 2 



1 I only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of mod- 
ern industry in England to 1845. For this period I refer the reader to "Die 
Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," von Friedrich Engels, Leipzig, 
1845. How completely Engels understood the nature of the capitalist mode 
of production is shown by the Factory Reports, Reports on Mines, &amp;c, that 
have appeared since 1845, and how wonderfully he painted the circumstances 
in detail is seen on the most superficial comparison of his work with the 
official reports of the Children's Employment Commission, published 18 to 
20 years later (1863-1867). These deal especially with the branches of in- 
dustry in which the Factory Acts had not, up to 1862, been introduced, in 
fact are not yet introduced. Here, then, little or no alteration had been en- 
forced, by authority, in the conditions painted by Engels. I borrow my 
examples chiefly from the Free-trade period after 1848, that age of paradise, 
of which the commercial travellers for the great firm of Free-trade, blatant 
as ignorant, tell such fabulous tales. For the rest England figures here in 
the foreground because she is the classic representative of capitalist produc- 
tion, and she alone has a continuous set of official statistics of the things 
we are considering. 

2 "Suggestions, &amp;c. by Mr. L. Horner, Inspector of Factories," in 
Factories Regulation Acts. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 
0th August, 1859, pp. 4, 5. 



THE WORKING-DAY 241 



"Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, 
are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year." 1 

"An additional hour a day gained by small instalments be- 
fore 6 a. m., after 6 p. m., and at the beginning and end of the 
times nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 
13 months in the year." 2 

Crises during which production is interrupted and the fac- 
tories work "short time," i.e., for only a part of the week, natu- 
rally do not affect the tendency to extend the working-day. The 
less business there is, the more profit has to be made on the busi- 
ness done. The less time spent in work, the more of that time has 
to be turned into surplus labour-time. 

Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the cri- 
sis from 1857 to 1858: 

"It may seem inconsistent that there should be any over- 
working at a time when trade is so bad; but that very badness 
leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the ex- 
tra profit of it In the last half year, says Leonard Hor- 
ner, 122 mills in my district have been given up; 143 were found 
standing," yet, over-work is continued beyond the legal hours. 3 

"For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the 
depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a 
still greater number were working short time. I continue, how- 
ever, to receive about the usual number of complaints that half, 
or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the 
workers by encroaching upon the times professedly allowed for 
rest and refreshment." 4 The same phenomenon was reproduced 
on a smaller scale during the frightful cotton-crisis from 1861 
to 1865. 5 "It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when 
persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, 
or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill at the 
appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them 
to cease work [cleaning their machinery, &amp;c], especially on 
Saturday afternoons. But, if the hands remain in a factory aft- 
er the machinery has ceased to revolve . . . they would not 



1 Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year, October, 1856, 
p. 35. 

2 Reports, &amp;c, 30th April, 1858, p. 9. 

3 Reports, &amp;c, I. c, p. 10. 

4 Reports, &amp;c, I. c, p 25. 

5 Reports, &amp;c, for the half year ending 30th April, 1861. See Appen- 
dix No. 2; Reports, &amp;c, 31st October, 1862, pp. 7, 52, 53. The violations of 
the Acts became more numerous during the last half year 1863. Gf. Reports, 
&amp;c, ending 31st October, 1863, p. 7. 



242 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart spe- 
cially for cleaning, &amp;c, either before 6 a. m. [sic/] or before 2 
p. m. on Saturday afternoons." 1 

"The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of 
the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation than they 
can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found 
out; and when they see the small amount of penalty and costs, 
which those who have been convicted have had to pay, they find 
that if they should be detected there will still be a considerable 
balance of gain. . . . 2 In cases where the additional time is 
gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, 
there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out 
a case." 3 

These "small thefts" of capital from the labourer's meal and 
recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as "petty 
pilferings of minutes," 4 "snatching a few minutes," 5 or, as the 
labourers technically called them, "nibbling and cribbling at 
meal-times." 6 



1 Reports, &amp;c, October 31st, 1860, p. 23. With what fanaticism, accord- 
ing to the evidence of manufacturers given in courts of law, their hands 
set themselves against every interruption in factory labour, the following curi- 
ous circumstance shows. In the beginning of June, 1836, information reached 
the magistrates of Dewsbury (Yorkshire) that the owners of 8 large mills 
in the neighbourhood of Batley had violated the Factory Acts. Some of these 
gentlemen were accused of having kept at work 5 boys between 12 and 15 years 
of age, from 6a.m. on Friday to 4p.m. on the following Saturday, not allowing 
them any respite except for meals and one hour for sleep at midnight. And 
these children had to do this ceaseless labour of 30 hours in the "shoddy- 
hole," as the hole is called, in which the woollen rags are pulled in pieces, 
and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, &amp;c, forces even the adult 
workman to cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protec- 
tion of his lungs! The accused gentlemen affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as 
quakers they were too scrupulously religious to take an oath— that they 
had, in their great compassion for the unhappy children, allowed them four 
hours for sleep, but the obstinate children absolutely would not go to bed. 
The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. Dryden anticipated these gentry: 

"Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity, 
That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie, 
That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer, 
And durst not sin! before he said his prayer!" 

2 Rep., 31st Oct., 1856, p. 34. 

3 1. c, p 35. 
* 1. c. p 48. 

5 I. c, p 48. 

6 1. c, p. 48. 



THE WORKING-DAY 243 



It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus- 
value by surplus-labour, is no secret. "If you allow me," said 
a highly respectable master to me, "to work only ten minutes 
in the day over-time, you put one thousand a year in my pocket." 1 
"Moments are the elements of profit." 2 

Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than 
the designation of the workers who work full time as "full-timers," 
and the children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours 
as "half-timers." The worker is here nothing more than personi- 
fied labour-time. All individual distinctions are merged in those 
of "full-timers" and "half-timers." 3 

SECTION 3.— BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY 
WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO EXPLOITATION 

We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of 
the working-day, the were-wolf's hunger for surplus-labour in 
a department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, 
says an English bourgeois economist, by the cruelties of the 
Spaniards to the American red-skins, 4 caused capital at last to 
be bound by the chains of legal regulations. Now, let us cast 
a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploita- 
tion of labour is either free from fetters to this day, or was so 
yesterday. 

Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as 
chairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, 
on the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of priva- 
tion and suffering among that portion of th« population con- 
nected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the king- 
dom, indeed, in the civilised world... Children of nine or 
ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or 
four o'clock in the morning and compelled to work for a bare 
subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs 



1 1. c, p. 48. 

2 Report of the Insp. &amp;c, 30th April, 1860, p. 56. 

3 This is the official expression both in the factories and in the reports. 
* "The cupidity of mill-owners whose cruelties in the pursuit of 

gain have hardly been exceeded by those perpetrated by the Spaniards on 
the conquest of America in the pursuit of gold." John Wade, "History ol the 
Middle and Working Classes," 3rd Ed. London, 1835, p 114. The theoretical 
part of this book, a kind of hand-book of Political Economy, is, consider- 
ing the time of its publication, original in some parts, e.g., on commercial 
crises. The historical part is, to a great extent, a shameless plagiarism of 
Sir F. M. Eden's "The State of the Poor," London, 1797. 



244 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faces whitening, 
and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, 
utterly horrible to contemplate We are not sur- 
prised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should stand 

forward and protest against discussion The system, as 

the Rev. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of unmitigated slav- 
ery, socially, physically, morally, and spiritually 

What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to 
petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished 
to eighteen hours a day? .... We declaim against the Vir- 
ginian and Carolinian cotton-planters. Is their black-market, 
their lash, and their barter of human flesh more detestable than 
this slow sacrifice of humanity which takes place in order that 
veils and collars may be fabricated for the benefit of capitalists?" 1 

The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, 
been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The result is 
embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of 1841 to the "Children's 
Employment Commissioners," in the report of Dr. Greenhow 
of 1860 published by order of the medical officer of the Privy 
Council (Public Health, 3rd Report, 112-113), lastly, in the 
report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the "First Report of the Chil- 
dren's Employment Commission, of the 13th June, 1863." For 
my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 
1863, some depositions of the exploited children themselves. 
From the children we may form an opinion as to the adults, 
especially the girls and women, and that in a branch of industry 
by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable and 
healthful occupation. 2 

William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when 
he began to work. He "ran moulds" (carried ready-moulded ar- 
ticles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the 
empty mould) from the beginning. He came to work every day 
in the week at 6 a. m., and left off about 9 p. m. "I work till 
9 o'clock at night six days in the week. I have done so seven 
or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! 
J. Murray, 12 years of age, says: "I turn jigger, and run moulds. 
I come at 6. Sometimes I come at 4. I worked all night last night, 
till 6 o'clock this morning. I have not been in bed since the night 
before last. There were eight or nine other boys working last night. 
All but one have come this morning. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. I 



1 Daily Telegraph, 17th January, 1860. 

2 Gf. F. Engels' "Lage, etc." pp 249-51. 



THE WORKING-DAY 245 



do not get any more for working at night. I worked two nights 
last week." Fernyhough, a boy often: "I have not always an hour 
(for dinner). I have onTy half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, 
Friday, and Saturday." 1 

Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in 
the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is ex- 
traordinarily short. Although in the district of Stoke, only 
36.6% and in Wolstanton only 30.4% of the adult male popu- 
lation above 20 are employed in the potteries, among the men 

of that age in the first district more than half, in the second, 

2 
nearly -=- of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary diseases 

o 

among the potters. Dr. Boothroyd, a medical practitioner 
at Hanley, says: "Each successive generation of potters is more 
dwarfed and less robust than the preceding one." In like man- 
ner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practise 
among the potters 25 years ago, he had observed a marked de- 
generation especially shown in diminution of stature and 
breadth." These statements are taken from the report of Dr. 
Greenhow in I860. 2 

From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: 
Dr. J. T. Arledge, senior physician of the North Staffordshire 
Infirmary, says: "The potters as a class, both men and women, 
represent a degenerated population, both physically and morally. 
They are, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently 
ill-formed in the chest; they become prematurely old, and are 
certainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and 
exhibit their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of 
dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by rheu- 
matism. But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest- 
disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma. One 
form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's 
asthma, or potter's consumption. Scrofula attacking the glands, 
or bones, or other parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds 

or more of the potters That the 'degenerescence' of 

the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is 
due to the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and 
intermarriages with more healthy races." 3 



1 Children's Employment Commission. First report, etc., 1863. Evi- 
dence, pp. 16, 19, 18. 

2 Public Health, 3rd report, etc., pp. 102, 104, 105. 
8 Child. Empl. Comm. 1. Report, p. 24. 



246 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institu- 
tion, writes in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst other 
things: "I can only speak from personal observation and not from 
statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert that my indigna- 
tion has been aroused again and again at the sight of poor 
children whose health has been sacrificed to gratify the avarice 
of either parents or employers." He enumerates the causes of 
the diseases of the potters, and sums them up in the phrase, 
"long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that "a manu- 
facture which has assumed so prominent a place in the whole 
world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great 
success is accompanied with the physical deterioration, wide- 
spread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeople . . . 
by whose labour and skill such great results have been 
achieved." 1 And all that holds of the potteries in England is 
true of those in Scotland. 2 

The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from 
the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to the 
match itself. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly devel- 
oped in England, and has extended especially amongst the 
thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, 
Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and Glas- 
gow. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna 
physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar to 
lucifer-matchmakers. Half the workers are children under 
thirteen, and young persons under eighteen. The manufacture 
is on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such 
bad odour that only the most miserable part of the labouring 
class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up their 
children to it, "the ragged, half-starved, untaught children." 3 

Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 
270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only 6 years 
old. A range of the working-day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, 
night-labour, irregular meal-times, meals for the most part 
taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phospho- 
rus. Dante would have found the worst horrors of his 
Inferno surpassed in this manufacture. 

In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are 
printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing). The 



1 Children's Employment Commission, p. 22, and xi. 

2 1. c, p. xlvii. 
8 I. c, p. liv. 



THE WORKING-DAY 247 



most active business months are from the beginning of October 
to the end of April. During this time the work goes on fast and 
furious without intermission from 6 a. m. to 10 p. m. or further 
into the night. 

J. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen girls 
were away from ill-health at one time from over-work. I have 
to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. Duffy: "I have seen 
when the children could none of them keep their eyes open for 
the work; indeed, none of us could." J. Lightbourne: "Am 13 . . . 
We worked last winter till 9 (evening), and the winter before till 
10. I used to cry with sore feet every night last winter." G. Aps- 
den: "That boy of mine . . . when he was 7 years old I used to 
carry him on my back to and fro through the snow, and he used 
to have 16 hours a day ... I have often knelt down to feed 
him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop." 
Smith, the managing partner of a Manchester factory: "We (he 
means his "hands" who work for "us") work on, with no stoppage 

for meals, so that the day's work of lOyhours is finished by 4.30 
p. m., and all after that is over-time." 1 (Does this Mr. Smith take 
no meals himself during 10y hours?) "We (this same Smith) sel- 
dom leave off working before 6 p. m. (he means leave off the 
consumption of "our" labour-power machines), so that we (ite- 
rum Grispinus) are really working over-time the whole year 

round For all these, children and adults alike (152 

children and young persons and 140 adults), the average work 
for the last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, 5 
hours, or 78^- hours a week. For the six weeks ending May 

2nd this year~(1862), the average was higher— 8 days or 84 
hours a week." Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely 
devoted to the pluralis majestatis, adds with a smile, "Machine- 
work is not great." So the employers in the block-printing say: 
"Hand labour is more healthy than machine-work." On the 
whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the 
1 This is not to be taken in the same sense as our surplus-labour 
time. These gentlemen consider lO-^- hours of labour as the normal working- 
day which includes ot course the normal surplus-labour. After this be- 
gins "over-time" which is paid a little better. It will be seen later that the 
labour expended during the so-called normal day is paid below its value, 
so that the over-time is simply a capitalist trick in order to extort more 
surplus-labour, which it would still be, even if the labour-power expend- 
ed during the normal working-day were properly paid. 



248 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

proposal "to stop the machines at least during meal-times." 
A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in 
the Borough, "which allowed work between, say 6 a. m. and 9 
p. m. ... would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 
6 a. m. to 6 p. m., are not suitable. Our machine is always 
stopped for dinner. (What generosity!) There is no waste of pa- 
per and colour to speak of. But," he adds sympathetically, "I can 
understand the loss of time not being liked." The report of the 
Commission opines with naivete that the fear of some "leading 
firms" of losing time, i.e., the time for appropriating the labour 
of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient reason for 
allowing children under 13, and young persons under 18, working 
12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it to 
them as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine, soap 
to wool, oil to the wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the 
instruments of labour, during the process of production itself. * 

No branch of industry in England (we do not take into 
account the making of bread by machinery recently introduced) 
has preserved up to the present day a method of production 
so archaic, so — as we see from the poets of the Roman Em- 
pire — pre-christian, as baking. But capital, as was said earlier, 
is at first indifferent as to the technical character of the labour- 
process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it. 

The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, 
was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee "on 
the adulteration of articles of food" (1855-56), and Dr. Has- 
sall's work, "Adulterations detected." 2 The consequence of these 
revelations was the Act of August 6th, 1860, "for preventing the 
adulteration of articles of food and drink," an inoperative law, 
as it naturally shows the tenderest consideration for every Free- 
trader who determines by the buying or selling of adulterated 
commodities "to turn an honest penny." 3 The Committee itself 
formulated more or less naively its conviction that Free-trade 
meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as the English in- 



1 I. c, Evidence, pp. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 54. 

2 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of com- 
merce bearing the significant name of "bakers' stuff." 

3 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms 
a manure that capitalistic chimney-sweeps sell to English farmers. Now in 
1862 the British juryman had in a law-suit to decide whether soot, with 
which, unknown to the buyer, 90% of dust and sand are mixed, is genuine 
soot in the commercial sense or adulterated soot in the legal sense. The "amis 
du commerce" decided it to be genuine commercial soot, and non-suited the 
plaintiff farmer, who had in addition to pay the costs of the suit. 



THE WORKING-DAY 249 



geniously put it, "sophisticated" goods. In fact this kind of so- 
phistry knows better than Protagoras how to make white black, 
and black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demon- 
strate ad oculos that everything is only appearance. 1 

At all events the Committee had directed the attention of 
the public to its "daily bread," and therefore to the baking trade. 
At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Par- 
liament rose the cry of the London journeymen bakers against 
their over-work, &amp;c. The cry was so urgent that Mr. H. S. Tre- 
menheere, also a member of the Commission of 1863 several times 
mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry. His 
report, 2 together with the evidence given, roused not the heart 
of the public but its stomach. Englishmen, always well up in 
the Bible, knew well enough that man, unless by elective grace 
a capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his 
bread in the sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he 
had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human per- 
spiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead 
black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without counting alum, 
sand, and other agreeable mineral ingredients. Without any re- 
gard to his holiness, Free-trade, the free baking-trade was there- 
fore placed under the supervision of the State inspectors (Close 
of the Parliamentary session of 1863), and by the same Act of 
Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning was 
forbidden for journeymen bakers under 18. The last clause speaks 
volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line 
of business. 

"The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, 
at about eleven at night. At that hour he 'makes the dough,' 
—a laborious process, which lasts from half an hour to three 
quarters of an hour, according to the size of the batch or the 
labour bestowed upon it. He then lies down upon the kneading- 
board, which is also the covering of the trough in which 



1 The French chemist, Chevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistica- 
tions" of commodities, enumerates for many of the 600 or more articles 
which he passes in review, 10, 20, 30 different methods of adulteration. He 
adds that he does not know all the methods, and does not mention all that he 
knows. He gives 6 kinds of adulteration of sugar, 9 of olive oil, 10 of nutter, 
12 of salt, 19 of milk, 20 of bread, 23 of brandy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 
30 of wine, 32 of coffee, etc. Even God Almighty does not escape this fate. 
See Rouard de Card, "On the Falsifications of the Materials of the Sacrament." 
("De la falsification des substances sacramentelles," Paris, 1856.) 

2 "Report, &amp;c, relative to the grievances complained of by the jour- 
neymen bakers, &amp;c, London, 1862," and "Second Report, &amp;c, London, 1863." 



250 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and another 
rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for about a couple of hours. He 
is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about 
five hours— throwing out the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding 
it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and 
fancy bread, taking the batch bread out of the oven, and up in- 
to the shop, &amp;c, &amp;c. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges 
from about 75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller 
bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to 
the lower degree of heat. When the business of making the 
bread, rolls, &amp;c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and a 
considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after 
working hard in the manner described during the night, are 
upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, 
or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes again in the bakehouse, 
leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p. m. ac- 
cording to the season of the year, or the amount and nature 
of their master's business; while others are again engaged in 
the bakehouse in 'bringing out' more batches until late in the 
afternoon. 1 . . . During what is called 'the London season,' 
the operatives belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West 
End of the town, generally begin work at 11 p. m., and are en- 
gaged in making the bread, with one or two short (sometimes 
very short) intervals of rest, up to 8 o'clock the next morning. 
They are then engaged all day long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late 
as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out bread, or sometimes in 
the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit- 
baking. They may have, after they have done their work, some- 
times five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep be- 
fore they begin again. On Fridays they always begin sooner, 
some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, 
either in making or delivering the bread up to 8 p. m. on 
Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, 
Sunday morning. On Sundays the men must attend twice or 
three times during the day for an hour or two to make prep- 
arations for the next day's bread. . . . The men employed 
by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 
'full price,' and who, as already pointed out, comprise three- 
fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the 
average longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined 
to the bakehouse. The underselling masters generally sell their 



1 1. c. First Report, &amp;c, p. vi. 



THE WORKING-DAY 251 



bread. ... in the shop. If they send it out, which is not common, 
except as supplying chandlers' shops, they usually employ other 
hands for that purpose. It is not their practice to deliver bread 

from house to house. Towards the end of the week the 

men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with 
only slight intermission until late on Saturday evening." 1 

Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the 
"underselling" masters. "The unpaid labour of the men was 
made the source whereby the competition was carried on." 2 And 
the "full-priced" baker denounces his underselling competitors 
to the Commission of Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and 
adulterators. "They only exist now by first defrauding the public, 
and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' 
wages." 3 

The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of 
bakers that sells the bread below the full price, date from the 
beginning of the 18th century, from the time when the corpo- 
rate character of the trade was lost, and the capitalist in the 
form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal master 
baker. 4 Thus was laid the foundation of capitalistic production 
in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and 
of night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a se- 
rious footing, even in London. 5 

After what has just been said, it will be understood that the 
Report of the Commission classes journeymen bakers among the 
short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the nor- 
mal decimation of the children of the working-class, rarely reach 
the age of 42. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always over- 
whelmed with applicants. The sources of the supply of these labour- 
powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural dis- 
tricts of England, and Germany. 



1 1. c, p. lxxi. 

2 George Read, "The History of Baking," London, 1848, p. 16. 

3 Report (First) &amp;c. Evidence of the "full-priced" baker Cheeseman, 
p. 108, 

4 George Read, 1. c. At the end of the 17th and the beginning oi the 
18th centuries the factors (agents) that crowded into every possible trade 
were still denounced as "public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quar- 
ter session of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed 
a presentment to the Lower House which, among other things, states, "that 
these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the 
Clothing Trade, and ought to be put down as a Nuisance." "The Case of 
our English Wool., &amp;c," London, 1685, pp. 6, 7. 

* First Report, &amp;c. 



252 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland 
organised at their own expense great meetings to agitate 
against night and Sunday work. The public— e.g., at the Dub- 
lin meeting in May, 1860 — took their part with Irish warmth. 
As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully 
established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Waterford, &amp;c. 
"In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are dem- 
onstrated to be excessive, the movement has been defeated by 
the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the 
greatest opponents. The example of Limerick led to a retrogres- 
sion in Ennis and Tipperary. In Cork, where the strongest pos- 
sible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exer- 
cising their power of turning the men out of employment, have 
defeated the movement. In Dublin, the master bakers have of- 
fered the most determined opposition to the movement, and by dis- 
countenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting 
it, have succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sun- 
day work and night-work, contrary to the convictions of the men." 1 
The Committee of the English Government, which Govern- 
ment, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally knows 
how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funeral, tones 
with the implacable master bakers of Dublin, Limerick, Cork, 
&amp;c. "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are lim- 
ited by natural laws, which cannot be violated with impu- 
nity. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by 
the fear of losing employment, to violate their religious con- 
victions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws of the 
land, and to disregard public opinion (this all refers to Sunday 
labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen 
and masters, . . . and affords an example dangerous to reli- 
gion, morality, and social order. . . . The Committee be- 
lieve that any constant work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches 
on the domestic and private life of the working-man, and so leads 
to disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and 
the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother, a husband, 
a father. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to under- 
mine the health of the working-man, and so leads to premature 
old age and death, to the great injury of families of working-men, 
thus deprived of the care and support of the head of the family 
when most required."* 



1 Report oi Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 1861. 
* 1. c. 



THE WORKING-DAY 



253 



So far, we have dealt with Ireland. On the other side of 
the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the plough- 
man, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most in- 
clement climate, with 4 hours' additional work on Sunday (in 
this land of Sabbatarians!), 1 whilst, at the same time, three 
railway men are standing before a London coroner's jury— a 
guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway 
accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another world. 
The negligence of the employes is the cause of the mis- 
fortune. They declare with one voice before the jury that 
ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours 
a-day. During the last five or six years it had been screwed up 
to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe pressure 
of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often lasted 
for 40 or 50 hours without a break. They were ordinary men, 
not Cyclops. At a certain point their labour-power failed. Tor- 
por seized them. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see. 
The thoroughly "respectable" British jurymen answered by a 
verdict that sent them to the next assizes on a charge of man- 
slaughter, and, in a gentle "rider" to their verdict, expressed the 
pious hope that the capitalistic magnates of the railways would, 
in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a sufficient 
quantity of labour-power, and more "abstemious," more "self- 
denying," more "thrifty," in the draining of paid labour-power. 2 

From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, 
sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the slain 
on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the Blue books 
under their arms — we see at a glance the mark of over-work, 
let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves that 
before capital all men are alike— a milliner and a blacksmith. 

1 Public meeting of agricultural labourers at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, 
January 5th, 1866. (See Workman's Advocate, January 13th, 1866.) The 
formation since the close of 1865 of a Trades' Union among the agricultural 
labourers at first in Scotland is a historic event. In one of the most oppressed 
agricultural districts of England, Buckinghamshire, the labourers, in March, 
1867, made a great strike for the raising of their weekly wage from 9-10 
shillings to 12 shillings. (It will be seen from the preceding passage that the 
movement of the English agricultural proletariat, entirely crushed since 
the suppression of its violent manifestations after 1830. and especially 
since the introduction of the new Poor Laws, begins again in the sixties, 
until it becomes finally epoch-making in 1872. I return to this in the 2nd 
volume, as well as to the Blue books that have appeared since 1867 on the 
position of the English land labourers. Addendum to the 3rd ed.) 

2 Reynolds' Newspaper, January, 1866. — Every week this same 
paper has, under the sensational headings, "Fearful and fatal accidents," 



254 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers 
published a paragraph with the "sensational" heading, "Death 
from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the milli- 
ner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age, employed in a highly- 
respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a lady 
with the pleasant name of Elise. The old, often-told story, 1 

was once more recounted. This girl worked, on an average, 16^ 

hours, during the season often 30 hours, without a break, 
whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional 
supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height 
of the season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling 
of an eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to 
the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales. 

Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 26y 

hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that only afforded -j 

of the cubic feet of air required for them. At night, they slept 
in pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was 
divided by partitions of board. 2 And this was one of the best 

Appalling tragedies," &amp;c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. On 
these an employe on the North Staffordshire line comments: "Everyone knows 
the consequences that may occur if the driver and fireman of a locomotive 
engine are not continually on the look-out. How can that be expected from 
a man who has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, exposed to the weather, 
and without rest. The following is an example which is of very frequent 
occurrence: — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning at 
a very early hour. When he had finished what is called a day's work, he 
had been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. Before he had time to get his tea, he 
was again called on for duty.... The next time he finished he had been on duty 

14 hours 25 minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without inter- 
mission. The rest of the week's work was made up as follows: — Wednesday, 

1 

15 hours; Thursday, 15 hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14— hours; Saturday, 

14 hours 10 minutes, making a total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. 
iNow, sir, fancy his astonishment on being paid 6—- days for the whole. Think- 
ing it was a mistake, he applied to the time-keeper, ... and inquired what 
they considered a day's work, and was told 13 hours for a goods man (i.e., 
78 hours).... He then asked for what he had made over and above the 78 hours 
per week, but was refused. However, he was at last told they would give 
him another quarter, i.e., 10 d.," I. c, 4th February, 1866. 

1 Cf. F. Engels, 1. c, pp. 253, 254. 

2 Dr. Letheby, Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared: 
"The minimum of air for each adult ought to be in a sleeping room 300, 
and in a dwelling room 500 cubic feet." Dr. Richardson', Senior Physician 
to one of the London Hospitals: "With needlewomen of all kinds, including 



THE WORKING -DAY 255 



millinery establishments in London. Mary Anne Walkley fell 
ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment 
of Madame Elise, having previously completed the work in 
hand. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, du- 
ly bore witness before the coroner's jury that "Mary Anne Walk- 
ley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded work- 
room, and a too small and badly-ventilated bedroom." In or- 
der to give the doctor a lesson in good manners, the coroner's 
jury thereupon brought in a verdict that "the deceased had died 
of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that her death had 
been accelerated by over- work in an over-crowded workroom, &amp;c." 
"Our white slaves," cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free- 
traders, Gobden and Bright, "our white slaves, who are toiled in- 
to the grave, for the most part silently pine and die." * 

"It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is 
the order of the day, but in a thousand other places; in every 
place I had almost said, where 4 a thriving business' has to be 

milliners, dressmakers, and ordinary sempstresses, there are three miseries — 
over-work, deficient air, and either deficient food or deficient digestion.... 
Needlework, in the main, ... is infinitely better adapted to women than to 
men. But the mischiefs of the trade, in the metropolis especially, are that 
it is monopolised by some twenty-six capitalists, who, under the advan- 
tages that spring from capital, can bring in capital to force economy out of 
labour. This power tells throughout the whole class. If a dressmaker can get 
a little circle of customers, such is the competition that, in her home, she 
must work to the death to hold together, and this same over-work she must 
of necessity inflict on any who may assist her. If she fail, or do not try 
independently, she must join an establishment, where her labour is not 
less, but where her money is safe. Placed thus, she becomes a mere slave, 
tossed about with the variations of society. Now at home, in one room, starv- 
ing, or near to it, then engaged 15, 16, aye, even 18 hours out of the 24, 
in an air that is scarcely tolerable, and on food which, even if it be good, 
cannot be digested in the absence of pure air. On these victims, consump- 
tion, which is purely a disease of baa air, feeds." Dr. Richardson: "Work 
and Over-work," in "Social Science Review," 18th July, 1863. 

1 Morning Star, 23rd June, 1863.— The Times made use of the 
circumstance to defend the American slave-owners against Bright, &amp;c. "Very 
many of us think," says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, "that, while we work our 
own young women to death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the 
crack of the whip, as the instrument of compulsion, we have scarcely a right 
to hound on fire and slaughter against families who were born slave-owners, 
and who, at least, feed their slaves well, and work them lightly." In the 
same manner, the Standard, a Tory organ, fell foul of the Rev. Newman 
Hall: "He excommunicated the slave-owners, but prays with the fine folk 
who. without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors of London, 
&amp;.C., work 16 hours a-day for the wages of a dog." Finally, spake the oracle, 
Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der 
Kultus ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of 
contemporary history, the American Civ'.l War, to this level, that the Peter 



256 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

done. . . . We will take the blacksmith as a type. If the poets 
were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; 
he rises early and strikes his sparks before the sun; he eats and 
drinks and sleeps as no other man. Working in moderation, he is, 
in fact, in one of the best of human positions, physically speaking. 
But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of 
work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death- 
rate of his country. In Marylebone, blacksmiths die at the rate of 
31 per thousand per annum, or 11 above the mean of the male 
adults of the country in its entirety. The occupation, instinctive 
almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of 
human industry, is made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of 
the man. He can strike so many blows per day, walk so many steps, 
breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and live an aver- 
age, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so many more blows, 
to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths 
per day, and to increase altogether a fourth of his life. He meets 
the effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth 
more work, he dies at 37 for 50." 1 

SECTION 4.— DAY AND NIGHT WORK. 
THE RELAY SYSTEM 

Constant capital, the means of production, considered from 
the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only exist to 
absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional 
quantity of surplus-labour. While they fail to do this, their 
mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they 
represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless advance of 
capital. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon 
as the intermission of their employment necessitates additional 
outlay at the recommencement of work. The prolongation of 
the working-day beyond the limits of the natural day, into 
the night, only acts as a palliative. It quenches only in a slight 
degree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. To ap- 
propriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore, 



of the North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South with all his 
might, because the Peter of the North hires his labour by the day, and the 
Paul of the South hires his by the life. ("Macmi Han's Magazine." Ilias 
Americana in nuce. August, 1863.) Thus, the bubble of Tory sympathy for 
the urban workers — by no means for the rural — has burst at last. The sum 
of all is — slavery! 

1 Dr. Richardson, t c. 



THE WORKING-DAY 257 



the inherent tendency of capitalist production. But as it is phys- 
ically impossible to exploit the same individual labour-power 
constantly during the night as well as the day, to overcome this 
physical hindrance, an alternation becomes necessary between 
the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, and those 
who are used up by night. This alternation may be effected in 
various ways; e.g., it may be so arranged that part of the work- 
ers are one week employed on day-work, the next week on night- 
work. It is well known that this relay system, this alternation of 
two sets of workers, held full sway in the full-blooded youth- 
time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at the pres- 
ent time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton spinning 
of the Moscow district. This 24 hours' process of production exists 
to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great 
Britain that are still "free," in the blast-furnaces, forges, plate- 
rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in Eng- 
land, Wales, and Scotland. The working-time here includes, be- 
sides the 24 hours of the 6 working-days, a great part also of the 
24 hours of Sunday. The workers consist of men and women, 
adults and children of both sexes. The ages of the children and 
young persons run through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in 
some cases from 6) to 18. * 

In some branches of industry, the girls and women work 
through the night together with the males. 2 

Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night- 
labour, 3 the duration of the process of production, unbroken 



1 Children's Employment Commission. Third Report. London, 1864, 
pp. iv., v., vi. 

2 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women 
are employed on the pit banks and on the coke heaps, not only by day 
but also by night. This practice has been often noticed in Reports presented 
to Parliament, as -being attended with great and notorious evils. These fe- 
males employed with the men, hardly distinguished from them in their dress, 
and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are exposed to the deterioration of char- 
acter, arising from the loss of self-respect, which can hardly fail to follow 
from their unfeminine occupation." (1. c, 194, p. xxvi. Cf. Fourth Report 
(1865), 61, p. xiii.) It is the same in glass-works. 

8 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked: 
"It seems but natural that boys who work at night cannot sleep and get 
proper rest by day. but will be running about." (1. c, Fourth Report, 63, 
p. xiii.) On the importance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of 
the body, a physician writes: "Light also acts upon the tissues of the body 
directly in hardening them and supporting their elasticity. The muscles of 
animals, when they are deprived of a proper amount of light, become soft 
and inelastic, the nervous power loses its tone from defective stimulation^ 
and the elaboration of all growth seems to be perverted... In the case of 



258 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding 
the limits of the normal working-day, e. g., in the branches of 
industry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatigu- 
ing nature; the official working-day means for each worker 
usually 12 hours by night or day. But the over-work beyond this 
amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official 
report, "truly fearful." 1 

"It is impossible," the report continues, "for any mind to 
realise the amount of work described in the following passages 
as being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age .... 
without coming irresistibly to the conclusion that such abuses 
of the power of parents and of employers can no longer be al- 
lowed to exist." 2 

"The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns 
either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times, seems 
inevitably to open the door to their not unfrequently working 
unduly long hours. These hours are, indeed, in some cases, not 
only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. Amongst 
a number of boys it will, of course, not unfrequently happen that 
one or more are from some cause absent. When this happens, 
their place is made up by one or more boys, who work in the 
other turn. That this is a well understood system is plain . . . 
from the answer of the manager of some large rolling-mills, who, 
when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their 
turn was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I 
do,' and admitted the fact." 3 

"At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a. m. 

to 5y P- m -» a D0V worked about four nights every week till 

children, constant access to plenty of light during the day, and to the direct 
rays of the sun lor apart of it, is most essential to health. Light assists in 
the elaboration of good plastic blood, and hardens the fibre alter it has been 
laid down. It also acts as a stimulus upon the organs of sight, and by this 
means brings about more activity in the various cerebral functions." Dr. W. 
Strange, Senior Physician of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose 
work on "Health" (1864) this passage is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. 
White, one of the commissioners: "I have had opportunities formerly, when 
in Lancashire, of observing the effects of night-work upon children, and I 
have no hesitation in saying, contrary to what some employers were fond of 
asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon suffered in their 
health." (1. c, 284., p. 55.) That such a question should furnish the mate- 
rial of serious controversy, shows plainly how capitalist production acts on 
the brain-functions of capitalists and their retainers. 

1 1. c, 57, p. xii. 

2 1. c, Fourth Report (1865), 58, p. xii. 

3 1. c. 



THE WORK-ING-DAY £59 



1 

8^- p. m. at least . . . and this for six months. Another, at 9 

years old, sometimes made three 12-hour shifts running, and, 
when 10, has made two days and two nights running." A third, 
"now 10 . . . worked from 6 a. m. till 12 p. m. three nights, 
and till 9 p. m. the other nights." "Another, now 13, . . . 
worked from 6 p. m. till 12 noon next day, for a week together, 
and sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morn- 
ing till Tuesday night." "Another, now 12, has worked in an 
iron foundry at Stavely from 6 a. m. till 12 p. m. for a fortnight 
on end; could not do it any more." "George Allinsworth, age 9, 
came here as cellar-boy last Friday; next morning we had to be- 
gin at 3, so I stopped here all night. Live five miles off. Slept 
on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under me, 
and a bit of a jacket over me. The two other days I have been here 
at 6 a. m. Aye! it is hot in here. Before I came here I was nearly 
a year at the same work at some works in the country. Began 
there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning — always did, but was very 
gain [near] home, and could sleep at home. Other days I began 
at 6 in the morning, and gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &amp;c. 1 



1 1. c, p. xiii. The degree of culture of these "labour-powers" must 
naturally be such as appears in the following dialogues with one of the com- 
missioners: Jeremiah Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8; 4 fours are 
16. A king is him that has all the money and gold. We have a King (told it 
is a Queen), they call her the Princess Alexandra. Told that she married the 
Queen's son. The Queen's son is the Princess Alexandra. A Princess is a man." 
William Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in England. Think it is a country, 
but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 — "Have heard say that God 
made the world, and that all the people was drownded but one; heard say 
that one was a little bird." William Smith, age 15 — "God made man, man 
made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not know of London." Henry 
Matthewman, age 17 — "Had been to chapel, but missed a good many times 
lately. One name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I cannot say 
any others, and J cannot tell anything about him. He was not killed, but died 
like other people. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because 
he was religious in some ways, and others isn't." (1. c, p. xv.) "The devil is 
a good person. I don't know where he lives." "Christ was a wicked man." 
"This girl spelt God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." ("Ch. 
Employment Comm. V. Report, 1866," p. 55, n. 278.) The same system ob- 
tains in the glass and paper works as in the metallurgical, already cited. 
In the paper factories, where the paper is made by machinery, night-work 
is the rule for all processes, except rag-sorting. In some cases night-work, by 
relays, is carried on incessantly through the whole week, usually from Sun- 
day night until midnight of the following Saturday. Those who are on day- 
work work 5 days of 12, and 1 day of 18 hours; those on night-work 5 nights 
of 12, and 1 of 6 hours in each week. In other cases each set works 24 hours 
consecutively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 
on Saturday to make up the 24 hours. In other cases an intermediate system 



260 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' sys- 
tem. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the "cru- 
el and incredible" extension of the working-day are naturally 
passed over in silence. Capital only speaks of the system in its 
"normal" form. 

Messrs. Naylor &amp; Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ 
between 600 and 700 persons, among whom only 10 per cent, 
are under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night 
sets, thus express themselves: "The boys do not suffer from 

the heat. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90° 

At the forges and in the rolling-mills the hands work night and 
day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, 
i.e., from 6 a. m. to 6 p. m. In the forge the hours are from 12 to 12. 
Some of the hands always work in the night, without any alterna- 
tion of day and night work We do not find any differ- 
ence in the health of those who work regularly by night and 
those who work by day, and probably people can sleep better if 

they have the same period of rest than if it is changed 

About 20 of the boys under the age of 18 work in the night sets. 
. We could not well do without lads under 18 working 
by night. The objection would be the increase in the cost of pro- 
duction Skilled hands and the heads in every depart- 
ment are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number. 
But from the small proportion of boys that we em- 
ploy, the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night-work) is of little 
importance or interest to us." 1 

Mr. J. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. John Brown &amp; Co., 
steel and iron works, employing about 3,000 men and boys, part 



prevails, by which all employed on the paper-making machinery work 15 or 
16 hours every day in the week. This system, says Commissioner Lord, 
"seems to combine all the evils of both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." 
Children under 13, young persons under 18, and women, work under this 
night system. Sometimes under the 12 hours' system they are obliged, on ac- 
count of the non-appearance of those that ought to relieve them, to work 
a double turn of 24 hours. The evidence proves that boys and girls very often 
work over-time, which, not unfrequently, extends to 24 or even 36 hours 
of uninterrupted toil. In the continuous and unvarying process of glazing 
are found girls of 12 who work the whole month 14 hours a day, "without 
any regular relief or cessation beyond 2 or, at most, 3 breaks of half an hour 
each for meals." In some mills, where regular night-work has been entire- 
ly given up, over-work goes on to a terrible extent, "and that often in the 
dirtiest, and in the hottest, and in the most monotonous of the various 
processes." ("Ch. Employment Comm. Report IV., 1865," p. xxxviii, and 
xxxix ) 

1 Fourth Report, &amp;c, 1865, 79, p. xvi. 



THE WORKING-DAY 



261 



of whose operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes 
on night and day by relays, states "that in the heavier steel work 
one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." Their con- 
cern employs upwards of 500 boys under 18, of whom about -^- 

or 170 are under the age of 13. With reference to the proposed 
alteration of the law, Mr. Ellis says: "I do not think it 
would be very objectionable to require that no person under 
the age of 18 should work more than 12 hours in the 24. But we 
do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, 
at which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. But 
we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under the 
age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed to 
employ boys that we do have at night. Those boys who work 
in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also, be- 
cause the men could not work in the night sets only; it would 

ruin their health We think, however, that night-work 

in alternate weeks is no harm. (Messrs. Naylor &amp; Vickers, on 
the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their busi- 
ness, considered that periodically changed night-labour might 
possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) We find 
the men who do it, as well as the others who do other work only 

by day Our objections to not allowing boys under [ 

18 to work at night, would be on account of the increase of ex- 
pense, but this is the only reason. (What cynical naivete!) We 
think that the increase would be more than the trade, with due 
regard to its being successfully carried out, could fairly bear. 
(What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) Labour is scarce here, and 
might fall short if there were such a regulation." (i.e., Ellis Brown 
&amp; Go. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being obliged to pay. 
labour-power its full value.) 1 

The "Cyclops Steel and Iron Works," of Messrs. Cammell &amp; 
Co., are conducted on the same large scale as those of the above- 
mentioned John Brown &amp; Co. The managing director had 
handed in his evidence to the Government Commissioner, Mr. 
White, in writing. Later he found it convenient to suppress 
the MS. when it had been returned to him for revision. Mr. 
White, however, has a good memory. He remembered quite 
clearly that for the Messrs. Cyclops the forbidding of the night- 
labour of children and young persons "would be impossible, it 
would be tantamount to stopping their works," and yet their 



1. c, 80, p. xvi. 



232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

business employs little more than 6% of boys under 18, and 
less than 1% under 13. x 

On the same subject Mr. E. F. Sanderson, of the firm of 
Sanderson, Bros., &amp; Co., steel rolling-mills and forges, Attercliffe, 
says: "Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys un- 
der 18 from working at night. The chief would be the in- 
crease of cost from employing men instead of boys. I cannot say 
what this would be, but probably it would not be enough to 
enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and con- 
sequently it would fall on them, as of course the men (what 
queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it." Mr. Sanderson does 
not know how much he pays the children, but "perhaps the young- 
er boys get from 4s. to 5s. a week. . . . The boys' work is of a 
kind for which the strength of the boys is generally ('generally,' of 
course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently there would 
be no gain in the greater strength of the men to counterbalance the 
loss, or it would be only in the few cases in which the metal is 
heavy. The men would not like so well not to have boys under 
them, as men would be less obedient. Besides, boys must begin 
young to learn the trade. Leaving day-work alone open to boys 
would not answer this purpose." And why not? Why could not 
boys learn their handicraft in the day-time? Your reason? "Owing 
to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men 
would be separated half the time from their boys, and would 
lose half the profit which they make from them. The training 
which they give to an apprentice is considered as part of the 
return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the men to get it 
at a cheaper rate. Each man would want half of this profit." In 
other words, Messrs. Sanderson would have to pay part of the 
wages of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of by the 
night- work of the boys. Messrs. Sanderson's profit would thus 
fall to some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why 
boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day. 2 In addition to 
this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead 
of the boys, which they would not be able to stand. The difficul- 
ties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to 
the giving up of night-work altogether, and "as far as the work 
itself is concerned," says E. F. Sanderson, "this would suit as 



1 1. c, 82, p. xvii. 

2 In our reflecting and reasoning age a man is not worth much who 
cannot give a good reason for everything, no matter hpw bad or how crazy. 
Everything in the world that has been done wrong has been done wrong for 
the very best of reasons. (Hegel, 1. c, p. 249.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 263 



well, but — " But Messrs. Sanderson have something else to make 
besides steel. Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value 
making. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &amp;c, the build- 
ings, machinery, iron, coal, &amp;c, have something more to do 
than transform themselves into steel. They are there to absorb 
surplus-labour, and naturally absorb more in 24 hours than in 
12. In fact they give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a 
cheque on the working-time of a certain number of hands for all 
the 24 hours of the day, and they lose their character as capital, 
are therefore a pure loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their func- 
tion of absorbing labour is interrupted. "But then there would 
be the loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half 
the time, and to get through the amount of work which we are 
able to do on the present system, we should have to double our 
premises and plant, which would double the outlay." But why 
should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by 
the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose 
buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie "idle" during 
the night? E. F. Sanderson answers in the name of all the San- 
dersons: "It is true that there is this loss from machinery ly- 
ing idle in those manufactories in which work only goes on by 
day. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our 
case. If they were kept up there would be a waste of fuel (instead 
of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the workers), and if 
they were not, there would be loss of time in laying the fires and 
getting the heat up (whilst the loss of sleeping time, even to chil- 
dren of 8 is a gain of working-time for the Sanderson tribe), and 
the furnaces themselves would suffer from the changes of tem- 
perature." (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing from the 
day and night change of labour.) 1 



1 1. c, 85, p. xvii. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufac- 
turers that regular meal-times for the children are impossible because as a 
consequence a certain quantity of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would be 
'a pure loss" or "wasted," Commissioner White makes answer. His answer 
is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &amp;c, and their puny German plagiarists a la 
Roscher who are touched by the "abstinence," "self-denial," "saving," of the 
capitalists in the expenditure of their gold, and by their Timur-Tamer- 
lanish prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat beyond what is 
usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal-times were secured 
in these cases, but it seems likely not equal in money-value to the waste of 
animal power now going on in glass-houses throughout the kingdom from 
growing boys not having enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a 
little rest afterwards for digestion." (1. c, p. xlv.) And this in the year of 
progress 1865! Without considering the expenditure of strength in lifting 
and carrying, such a child, in the sheds where bottle and flint glass are made, 



264 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 5.— THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING-DAY. 

COMPULSORY LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE 
WORKING-DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE 14TH TO THE END 
OF THE 17TH CENTURY 

"What is a working-day? What is the length of time dur- 
ing which capital may consume the labour-power whose daily 
value it buys? How far may the working-day be extended 
beyond the working-time necessary for the reproduction of 
labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these ques- 
tions capital replies: the working-day contains the full 24 
hours, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without 
which labour-power absolutely refuses its services again. Hence 
it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his 
whole life through, than labour-power, that therefore all his 
disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted 
to the self-expansion of capital. Time for education, for intel- 
lectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions and 
for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and men- 
tal activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a 
country of Sabbatarians!) 1 — moonshine! But in its blind un- 



walks during the performance of his work 15-20 miles in every 6 hours! 
And the work often lasts 14 or 15 hours! In many of these glass works, as in 
the Moscow spinning mills, the system of 6 hours' relays is in force. "During 
the working part of the week six hours is the utmost unbroken period ever 
attained at any one time for rest, and out of this has to come the time spent 
in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leav- 
ing a very short period indeed for rest, and none for fresh air and play, 
unless at the expense of the sleep necessary for young boys, especially at 
such hot and fatiguing work... Even the short sleep is obviously liable to be 
broken by a boy having to wake himself if it is night, or by the noise, if it 
is day." Mr. White gives cases where a boy worked 36 consecutive hours; 
others where boys of 12 drudged on until 2 in the morning, and then slept 
in the works till 5 a. m. (3 hours!) only to resume their work. "The amount of 
work," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general report, "done 
by boys, youths, girls, and women, in the course of their daily or nightly 
spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary." (1. c, xliii. and xliv.) Mean- 
while, late by night perhaps, self-denying Mr. Glass-Capital, primed with 
port wine, reels out of his club homeward droning out idiotically, "Britons 
never, never shall be slaves!" 

1 In England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is 
condemned to imprisonment for desecrating the Sabbath, by working in 
his front garden. The same labourer is punished for breach of contract if 
he remains away from his metal, paper, or glass works on the Sunday, even 
if it be from a religious whim. The orthodox Parliament will hear nothing 
of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital. A memo- 



THE WORKING-DAY 265 

restrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus-labour, 
capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely 
physical maximum bounds of the working-day. It usurps the 
time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of 
the body. It steals the time required for the consumption of 
fresh air and sunlight. It higgles over a meal-time, incorporat- 
ing it where possible with the process of production itself, so 
that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of pro- 
duction, as coal is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the 
machinery. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the resto- 
ration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so 
many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely 
exhausted, renders essential. It is not the normal maintenance 
of the labour-power which is to determine the limits of the 
working-day; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of 
labour-power, no matter how diseased, compulsory, and painful 
it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' 
period of repose. Capital cares nothing for the length of life of 
labour-power. All that concerns it is simply and solely the 
maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a 
working-day. It attains this end by shortening the extent of 
the labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased prod- 
uce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility. 

The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the pro- 
duction of surplus-value, the absorption of surplus-labour), 
produces thus, with the extension of the working-day, not only 
the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing it of its 
normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and 
function. It produces also the premature exhaustion and death 
of this labour-power itself. 1 It extends the labourer's time of 
production during a given period by shortening his actual life- 
time. 



rial (August 1863), in which the London day-labourers in fish and poultry 
shops asked for the abolition of Sunday labour, states that their work lasts 
for the first 6 days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 
8-10 hours. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gour- 
mands among the aristocratic hypocrites of Exeter Hall, especially encourage 
this "Sunday labour." These "holy ones," so zealous in cute curanda, show 
their Christianity by the humility with which they bear the over-work, the 
privations, and the hunger of others. Obsequium ventris istis (the labourers) 
perniciosius est. 

1 "We have given in our previous reports the statements of several 
experienced manufacturers to the effect that over-hours ... certainly tend pie* 
maturely to exhaust the working power of the men." (I. c, 64, p. xiii.) 



266 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the 
commodities necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or 
for the keeping up of the working-class. If then the unnatural 
extension of the working-day, that capital necessarily strives 
after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the 
length of life of the individual labourer, and therefore the 
duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be re- 
placed at a more rapid rate and the sum of the expenses for 
the reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a 
machine the part of its value to be reproduced every day is 
greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. It would 
seem therefore that the interest of capital itself points in the 
direction of a normal working-day. 

The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. If 
he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by 
new outlay in the slave-mart. But "the rice-grounds of Geor- 
gia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may be fatally injurious 
to the human constitution; but the waste of human life 
which the cultivation of these districts necessitates, is not 
so great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves 
of Virginia and Kentucky. Considerations of economy, more- 
over, which, under a natural system, afford some security for 
humane treatment by identifying the master's interest with 
the slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves is practised, 
become reasons for racking to the uttermost the toil of the 
slave; for, when his place can at once be supplied from foreign 
preserves, the duration of his life becomes a matter of less mo- 
ment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is accordingly 
a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries, 
that the most effective economy is that which takes out of the 
human chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount 
of exertion it is capable of putting forth. It is in tropical cul- 
ture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of planta- 
tions, that negro life is most recklessly sacrificed. It is the agri- 
culture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific 
of fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African 
race. It is in Cuba, at this day, whose revenues are reckoned by 
millions, and whose planters are princes, that we see in the ser- 
vile class, the coarsest L.re, the most exhausting and unremit- 
ting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a portion of its 
numbers every year." 1 



1 Cairnes, "The Slave Power," pp. 110, 111. 



THE WORKING-DAY 267 



Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. For slave-trade 
read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and 
the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, 
for Africa, Germany. We heard how over- work thinned the 
ranks of the bakers in London. Nevertheless, the London la- 
bour-market is always over-stocked with German and other 
candidates for death in the bakeries. Pottery, as we saw, is 
one of the shortest-lived industries. Is there any want there- 
fore of potters? Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pot- 
tery, himself originally a common workman, said in 1785 
before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed 
from 15,000 to 20,000 people. l In the year 1861 the population 
alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain num- 
bered 101 ,302. "The cotton trade has existed for ninety years. . . . 
It has existed for three generations of the English race, and I 
believe I may safely say that during that period it has destroyed 
nine generations of factory operatives." 2 

No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour- 
market shows significant gaps. In 1834, e.g. But then the 
manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that 
they should send the "surplus-population" of the agricultural 
districts to the north, with the explanation "that the manufac- 
turers would absorb and use it up." 3 "Agents were appoint- 
ed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. . . . 
An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of 
those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employ- 
ment, and their names were registered in books. The manufac- 
turers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as 
they chose; when they had selected such persons as their 'wants 
required,' they gave instructions to have them forwarded to Man- 
chester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales of goods, by ca- 
nals, or with carriers, others tramping on the road, and many of 
them were found on the way lost and half-starved. This system 
had grown up unto a regular trade. This House will hardly be- 
lieve it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as 
well kept up, they were in effect as regularly sold to these [Man- 
chester] manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower 
in the United States In 1860, 'the cotton trade was 



1 John Ward: "The Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, 
p. 42. 

2 Ferrand's Speech in the House of Commons, 27th April, 1863. 

8 "Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers,' 1 
I. c. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



at its zenith. 1 .... The manufacturers again found that 
they were short of hands. . . . They applied to the * flesh 
agents,' as they are called. Those agents sent to the southern 
downs of England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades 
of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but they 
sought in vain. The surplus-population was absorbed.'" The 
Bury Guardian said, on the completion of the French treaty, that 
"10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and 
that 30,000 or 40,000 will be needed." After the "flesh agents and 
sub-agents" had in vain sought through the agricultural districts, 
"a deputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon. 
gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with 
a view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses 
for the mills of Lancashire." * 



1 1. c. Mr. Villiers, despite the best of intentions on his part, was "le- 
gally" obliged to refuse the requests of the manufacturers. These gentle- 
men, however, attained their end through the obliging nature of the local 
poor law boards. Mr. A. Redgrave, Inspector of Factories, asserts that this 
time the system under which orphans and pauper children were treated 
"legally" as apprentices "was not accompanied with the old abuses" (on these 
"abuses" see Engels. 1. c), although in one case there certainly was "abuse 
of this system in respect to a number of girls and young women brought from 
the agricultural districts of Scotland into Lancashire and Cheshire." Under 
this system the manufacturer entered into a contract with the workhouse 
authorities for a certain period. He fed, clothed, and lodged the children, 
and gave them a small allowance of money. A remark of Mr. Redgrave to be 
quoted directly seems strange, especially if we consider that even among 
the years of prosperity of the English cotton trade, the year 1860 stands un- 
paralleled, and that, besides, wages were exceptionally high For this ex- 
traordinary demand for work had to contend with the depopulation of 
Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and Scotch agricul- 
tural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of the 
population in some of the English agricultural districts, in consequence 
partly of an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly 
of the already effected dispersion of the disposable population through the 
dealers in human flesh. Despite all this Mr. Redgrave says: "This kind of 
labour, however, would only be sought after when none other could be pro- 
cured, for it is a high-priced labour The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 would 
be about 4s. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to feed, and to provide 
medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, 
and to set aside some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished 
for 4s. a-head per week." (Report of the Inspector of Factories for 30th April, 
1860, p 27.) Mr Redgrave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can 
do all this for his children out of their 4s. a-week wages, when the manufac- 
turer cannot do it lor the 50 or 100 children lodged, boarded, superintended 
all together. To guard against false conclusions from the text, 1 ought here 
to remark that the English cotton industry, since it was placed under the 
Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour-time, &amp;c, must be regarded 
as the model industry of England. The English cotton operative is in every 



THE WORKING-DAY 269 



What experience shows to the capitalist genarally is a con- 
stant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the 
momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, 
although this excess is made up of generations of human beings 
stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked, so 
to say, before maturity. 1 And, indeed, experience shows to the 
intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist 
mode of production, dating, historically speaking, only from 
yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very 
root — shows how the degeneration of the industrial population 
is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and 
physically uncorrupted elements from the country— shows how 
even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air and the princi- 
ple of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, 
and only permits the survival of the strongest, are already be- 
ginning to die off. 2 Capital that has such good reasons for 
denying the sufferings of the legions of workers that surround 
it, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of 
the coming degradation and final depopulation of the human 
race, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. In every 



respect better off than his Continental companion in misery. "The Prussian 
factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than his English 
competitor, and if employed at his own loom in his own house, his labour 
is not restricted to even those additional hours." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 
31st October, 1855, p. 103.) Redgrave, the Factory Inspector mentioned 
above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, travelled on the Continent, 
especially in France and Germany, for the purpose of inquiring into the 
conditions of the factories. Of the Prussian operative he says: "He receives 
a remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the slender 
comforts to which he has been accustomed ... he lives upon his coarse fare, 
and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the English 
operative." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1855, p. 85.) 

1 The over-worked "die off with strange rapidity; but the places of 
those who perish are instantly filled, and a frequent change of persons makes 
no alteration in the scene." ("England and America." London, 1833, vol. I, 
p. 55. By E. G. Wakefield.) 

2 See "Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy 
Council, 1863." Published in London 1864. This report deals especially with 
the agricultural labourers. "Sutherland ... is commonly represented as a 
highly improved county ... but ... recent inquiry has discovered that even 
there, in districts once famous for fine men and gallant soldiers, the inhabi- 
tants have degenerated into a meagre and stunted race. In the healthiest 
situations, on hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of their famished children 
are as pale as they could be in the foul atmosphere of a London alley. 
(W. Th. Thornton. "Over-population and its Remedy." 1. c, pp. 74, 75.) 
They resemble in fact the 30,000 "gallant Highlanders" whom Glasgow pigs 
together in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and thieves. 



270 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

stock-jobbing swindle every one knows that some time or other 
the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on 
the head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the 
shower of gold and placed it in safety. Apres moi le deluge! is 
the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist 
nation. Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of 
life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society. 1 To 
the out-cry as to the physical and mental degradation, the pre- 
mature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these 
to trouble us since they increase our profits? But looking at 
things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good 
or ill will of the individual capitalist. Free competition brings 
out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of 
external coercive laws having power over every individual 
capitalist. 2 

The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of 
centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer. The 
history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. Com- 
pare, e.g. j the English factory legislation of our time with the 



1 "But though the health of a population is so important a fact of the 
national capital, we are afraid it must be said that the class of employers of 

labour have not been the most forward to guard and cherish this treasure 

The consideration of the health of theoperatives was forced upon themill-own- 
ers." (Times, November 5th, 1861.) "The men of the West Riding became 
the clothiers of mankind ... the health of the workpeople was sacrificed, and 
the race in a few generations must have degenerated. But a reaction set in. 
Lord Shaftesbury's Bill limited the hours of children's labour," &amp;c. ("Report 
of the Registrar-General." for October 1861.) 

2 We, therefore, find, e.g., that in the beginning of 1863, 26 firms 
owning extensive potteries in Staffordshire, amongst others, Josiah Wedg- 
wood, &amp; Sons, petition in a memorial for "some legislative enactment." 
Competition with other capitalists permits them no voluntary limitation 
of working-time for children, &amp;c. "Much as we deplore the evils before men- 
tioned, it would not be possible to prevent them by any scheme of agreement 
between the manufacturers.... Taking all these points into consideration, we 
have come to the conviction that some legislative enactment is wanted." 
("Children's Employment Comm." Rep. 1., 1863, p. 322.) Most recently a 
much more striking example offers. The rise in the price of cotton during a 
period of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in Blackburn to 
shorten, by mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a cer- 
tain fixed period. This period terminated about the end of November, 1871. 
Meanwhile, the wealthier manufacturers, who combined spinning with 
weaving, used the diminution of production resulting from this agreement, 
to extend their own business and thus to make great profits at the expense of 
the small employers. The latter thereupon turned in their extremity to the 
operatives, urs^ed them earnestly to agitate for the 9 hours' system, 
and promised contributions in money to this end. 



THE WORKING-DAY 271 



English Labour Statutes from the 14th century to well into 
the middle of the 18th. l Whilst the modern Factory Acts com- 
pulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried 
to lengthen it by compulsion. Of course the pretensions of 
capital in embryo— when, beginning to grow, it secures the 
right of absorbing a quantum sufficit of surplus-labour, not 
merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help of 
the State— appear very modest when put face to face with the 
concessions that, growling and struggling, it has to make in its 
adult condition. It takes centuries ere the "free" labourer, 
thanks to the development of capitalistic production, agrees, 
i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of his 
active life, his very capacity for work, for the price of the 
necessaries of life, his birthright for a mess of pottage. Hence 
it is natural that the lengthening of the working-day, which 
capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th 
century, tries to impose by State-measures on adult labourers, 
approximately coincides with the shortening of the working- 
day which", in the second half of the 19th century, has here and 
there been effected by the State to prevent the coining of 
children's blood into capital. That which to-day, e.g., in the 
State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of the 
North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statutory 
limit of the labour of children under 12, was in England, even 
in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of 
able-bodied artisans, robust labourers, athletic blacksmiths. 2 



1 The Labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time 
in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere, were first formally repealed in 
England in 1813, long after the changes in methods of production had ren- 
dered them obsolete. 

2 "No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufactur- 
ing establishment more than 10 hours in one day." General Statutes of Mas- 
sachusetts, 63, ch. 12. (The various Statutes were passed between 1836 and 
1858.) "Labour performed during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, 
woollen, silk, paper, glass, and flax factories, or in manufactories of iron and 
brass, shall be considered a legal day's labour. And be it enacted, that here- 
after no minor engaged in any factory shall be holden or required to work 
more than 10 hours in any day. or 60 hours in any week; and that hereafter no 
minor shall be admitted as a worker under the age of 10 years in any factory 
within this State." State of New Jersey. An Act to limit the hours of labour, 
&amp;c, § 1 and 2. (Law of 18th March, 1851.) "No minor who has attained the 
age of 12 years, and is under the age of 15 years, shall be employed in any 
manufacturing establishment more than 11 hours in any one day, nor before 
5 o'clock in the morning, nor after 7.30 in the evening " ("Revised Statutes 
of the State of Rhode Island," &amp;c, ch. 139, § 23, 1st July, 1857.) 



272 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The first "Statute of Labourers" (23 Edward III., 1349) 
found its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of 
this kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) 
in the great plague that decimated the people, so that, as a Tory 
writer says, "The difficulty of getting men to work on reason- 
able terms (i.e., at a price that left their employers a reasonable 
quantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite 
intolerable." 1 Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law 
as well as the limits of the working-day. The latter point, the 
only one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 
1496 (Henry VII.). The working-day for all artificers and 
field labourers from March to September ought, according to 
this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last from 
5 in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. But the 

meal-times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, ly hours for dinner, 

and — an hour for "noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as 

under the factory acts now in force. 2 In winter, work was to 
last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals. 
A statute of Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the work- 
ing-day for all labourers "hired for daily or weekly wage" un- 

touched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2y hours in the 

summer, or to 2 in the winter. Dinner is only to last 1 hour, 
and the "afternoon-sleep of half an hour" is only allowed 
between the middle of May and the middle of August. For 
every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wage. 
In practice, however, the conditions were much more favourable 
to the labourers than in the statute-book. William Petty, the 



1 "Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th Ed. London, 1850, p. 205, 9th Ed., 
p. 253. This same Tory, moreover, admits that "Acts of Parliament regulating 
wages, but against the labourer and in favour of the master, lasted for the 
long period of 464 years. Population grew. These laws were then found, 
and really became, unnecessary and burdensome." (I. c, p. 206.) 

2 In reference to this statute, J. Wade with truth remarks: "From tht 
statement above (i.e., with regard to the statute) it appears that in 1496 
the diet was considered equivalent to one-third of the income of an arti- 
ficer and one-half the income of a labourer, which indicates a greater degree 
of independence among the working-classes than prevails at present; for the 
board, both of labourers and artificers, would now be reckoned at a much 
higher proportion of their wages." (J. Wade, "History of the Middle and 
Working Classes," pp. 24, 25, and 577.) The opinion that this difference is due 
to the difference in the price-relations between food and clothing then and 
now is refuted by the most cursory glance at "Chronicon Preciosum, &amp;c." 
By Bishop Fleetwood. 1st Ed., London, 1707; 2nd Ed., London, 1745. 



THE WORKING-DAY 273 



father of Political Economy, and to some extent the founder of 
Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third of 
the 17th century: "Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) 
work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 
a day for working-days, and 2 on Sundays; whereby it is plain, 
that if they could fast on Friday nights, and dine in one hour 
and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; thereby 

1 1 

thus working ^ more, and spending kk less, the above-men- 
tioned (tax) might be raised." 1 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right 
in crying down the 12 hours' bill of 1833 as a retrogression to 
the times of the dark ages? It is true, these regulations con- 
tained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to ap- 
prentices. E}ut the condition of child-labour, even at the end 
of the 17th century, is seen from the following complaint: 
'"Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this king- 
dom, to bind an apprentice for seven years; three or four is 
their common standard: and the reason is, because they are 
educated from their cradle to something of employment, which 
renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the more 
capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency in 
business. Whereas our youth, here in England, being bred to 
nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow 
progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the 
perfection of accomplished artists." 2 



1 W. Petty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1672, 
Ed. 1691, p. 10. 

2 "A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," 
London, 1690, p. 13. Macaulay, who has falsified English history in the 
interests of the Whigs and the bourgeoisie, declares as follows: "The practice 
of setting children prematurely to work ... prevailed in the 17th century to 
an extent which, when compared with the extent of the manufacturing system, 
seems almost incredible. At Norwich, the chief seat of the clothing trade, a 
little creature of six years old was thought fit for labour. Several writers of 
that time, and among them some who were considered as eminently benevo- 
lent, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, boys and 
girls of very tender age create wealth exceeding what was necessary for 
their own subsistence by twelve thousand pounds a year. The more carefully 
we examine the history of the past, the more reason shall we find to dissent 
from those who imagine that our age has been fruitful of new social evils. ... 
That which is new is the intelligence and the humanity which remedies them." 
("History of England," vol. I., p. 417.) Macaulay might have reported- fur- 
ther that "extremely well-disposed" amis du commerce in the 17th century, 
narrate with "exultation" how in a poorhouse in Holland a child of four was 
employed, and that this example of "vertu mise en pratique" passes muster in 
all the humanitarian works, a la Macaulay, -to the time of Adam Smith. It 



274 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the 
epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in England 
had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the 
weekly value of labour-power, the whole week of the labourer, 
with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. 
The fact that they could live for a whole week on the wage of 
four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason 
that they should work the other two days for the capitalist. 
One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, de- 
nounces this obstinacy in the most violent manner, another 
party defends the labourers. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest 
between Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the 
same reputation as the kindred works of MacCulloch and 
MacGregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the "Essay 
on Trade and Commerce." 1 

Postlethwayt says among other things: "We cannot put an 
end to those few observations, without noticing that trite re- 
mark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor 
can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five days, they 
will not work the whole six. Whence they infer the necessity 
of even the necessaries of life being made dear by taxes, or any 
other means, to compel the working artisan and manufacturer 
to labour the whole six days in the week, without ceasing. 



is true that with the substitution of manufacture for handicrafts, traces 
of the exploitation of children begin to appear. This exploitation existed 
always to a certain extent among peasants, and was the more developed, the 
heavier the yoke pressing on the husbandman. The tendency of capital is 
there unmistakably; but the facts themselves are still as isolated as the phe- 
nomena of two-headed children. Hence they were noted "with exultation" 
as especially worthy of remark and as wonders by the far-seeing "amis du 
bommeree" and recommended as models for their own time and for posterity. 
This same Scotch sycophant and fine talker, Macaulay, says: "We hear to-day 
only of retrogression and see only progress." What eyes, and especially what 
ears! 

1 Among the accusers of the workpeople, the most angry is the anony- 
mous author quoted in the text of "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, con- 
taining Observations on Taxes, &amp;c," London, 1770. He had already dealt 
with this subject in his earlier work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 
1765. On the same side follows Polonius Arthur Young, the unutterable sta- 
tistical prattler. Among the defenders of the working-classes the foremost are: 
Jacob Vanderlint, in: "Money Answers all Things." London, 1734; the Rev. 
Nathaniel Forster, D. D., in "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present 
High Price of Provisions," London, 1767; Dr. Price, and especially Postleth- 
wayt, as well in the supplement to his "Universal Dictionary of Trade and 
Commerce," as in his "Great Britain's Commercial Interest explained and 
improved." 2nd Edition, 1755. The facts themselves are confirmed by many 
other writers of the time, amorig others by Josiah Tucker. 



THE WORKING-DAY 275 



I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great 
politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the work- 
ing people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all 
work and no play. Have not the English boasted of the in- 
genuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers 
which have heretofore given credit and reputation to British 
wares in general? What has this been owing to? To nothing 
more probably than the relaxation of the working people in 
their own way. Were they obliged to toil the year round, the 
whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same work, 
might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them stupid in- 
stead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose 
their reputation instead of maintaining it by such eternal 
slavery? .... And what sort of workmanship could we ex- 
pect from such hard-driven animals? .... Many of them 
will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in 
five or six. But if Englishmen are to be eternal drudges, 'tis 
to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. As 
our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say that it 
is owing to good English roast beef and pudding in their bellies, 
as well as their constitutional spirit of liberty? And why may 
not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of our artists and 
manufacturers, be owing to that freedom and liberty to direct 
themselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have 
them deprived of such privileges and that good living from 
whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may pro- 
ceed." 1 Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and 
Commerce" replies: "If the making of every seventh day an 
holiday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies 
the appropriating the other six days to labour" (he means cap- 
ital as we shall soon see) "surely it will not be thought 
cruel to enforce it ... . That mankind in general, are 
naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience 
to be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing populace, 
who do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, 

unless provisions happen to be very dear Put all the 

necessaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, 
call them all wheat, or suppose that. . . .the bushel of wheat 
shall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns a 
shilling by his labour, he then would be obliged to work 
five days only in a week. If the bushel of wheat should cost 



1 Postlethwayt, 1. c, "First Preliminary Discourse," p 14. 



276 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

but four shillings, he would be obliged to work but four days; 
but as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to 
the price of necessaries. . . . the manufacturer, who labours four 
days, has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the 
week .... I hope I have said enough to make it appear 
that the moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. 
Our labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the hap- 
piest of all our labouring poor, l but the Dutch do this in 
manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. The 
French do so, when holidays do not intervene. 2 But our popu- 
lace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a 
birthright privilege of being more free and independent than 
in any country in Europe. Now this idea, as far as it may 
affect the bravery of our troops, may be of some use; but the 
less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for 
themselves and for the State. The labouring people should 

never think themselves independent of their superiors 

It is extremely dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial 
state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the 
whole, are people with little or no property. The cure will 
not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to 
labour six days for the same sum which they now earn in four 
days." 3 To this end, and for "extirpating idleness, debauchery 
and excess," promoting a spirit of industry, "lowering the price 
of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of the 
heavy burden of poor's rates," our "faithful Eckart" of capital 
proposes this approved device: to shut up such labourers as 
become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in "an 
ideal workhouse." Such ideal workhouse must be made a 
"House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, "where they 
are to be plentifully fed, warmly and decently clothed, and where 
they do but little work." 4 In this "House of Terror," this 
"ideal workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, al- 



1 "An Essay," &amp;c. He himself relates on p. 96 wherein the "happiness" 
of the English agricultural labourer already in 1770 consisted. "Their powers 
are always upon the stretch, they cannot live cheaper than they do, nor work 
harder." 

2 Protestantism, by changing almost all the traditional holidays into 
workdays, plays an important part in the genesis of capital. 

3 "An Essay," &amp;c, pp. 15, 41, 96, 97, 55, 57, 69.— Jacob Vanderlint, 
as early as 1734, declared that the secret of the out-cry of the capitalists a.s 
to the laziness of the working people was simply that they claimed for the 
same wages 6 days' labour instead of 4. 

4 1. c, p. 242. 



THE WORKING-DAY 277 

lowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shall 
remain 12 hours of neat-labour." 1 

Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the 
"House of Terror" of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833, when the 
English Parliament reduced the working-day for children of 
13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12 full hours, the 
judgment day of English Industry had dawned! In 1852, 
when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his position with the 
bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working-day, the 
French people cried out with one voice "the law that limits 
the working-day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained 
to us of the legislation of the Republic!" 2 At Zurich the work 
of children over 10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, 
the work of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 

12-^- to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14 

and 16, the same reduction was made. 3 "What a progress," since 
1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation! 

The "House of Terror" for paupers of which the capitalistic 
soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years later in the 
shape of a gigantic "Workhouse" for the industrial worker him- 
self. It is called the Factory. And the ideal this time fades before 
the reality. 



1 1. c. "The French," he says, "laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liber- 
ty." I. c, p. 78. 

2 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, 
because the law which fixed those hours, is the only good which remains 
to 'them of the legislation of the Republic." ("Rep. of (nsp. of Fact.," 31st 
October, 1856, p. 80.) The French Twelve Hours' Bill of September 5th, 
1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of the Provisional Government of 
March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshops without exceptions. Before this 
law the working-day in France was without definite limit. Tt lasted in the 
factories 14, 15, or more hours. See "Des classes ouvrieres en France, pendant 
l'annee 1848. Par M. Blanqui." M. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolu- 
tionist, had been entrusted by the Government with an inquiry into the 
condition of the working-class. 

3 Belgium is the model bourgeois state in regard to the regulation ot 
the working-day. Lord Howard of Welden, English Plenipotentiary at Brus- 
sels, reports to the Foreign Office, May 12th, 1862: "M. Rogier, the minister, 
informed me that children's labour is limited neither by a general law nor 
by any local regulations; that the Government, during the last three years, 
intended in every session to propose a bill on the subject, but always found 
an insuperable obstacle in the jealous opposition to any legislation in con- 
tradiction with the principle of perfect freedom of labour." 



278 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

SECTION 6.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. 

COMPULSORY LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING-TIME. 

THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS, 1833 TO 1864 

After capital had taken centuries in extending the working- 
day to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this to the 
limit of the natural day of 12 hours, 1 there followed on the 
birth of machinism and modern industry in the last third of 
the 18th century, a violent encroachment like that of an 
avalanche in its intensity and extent. All bounds of morals 
and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. 
Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic simplicity in the old 
statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late as 
1860, needed a quite Talmudic sagacity to explain "judicially" 
what was day and what was night. 2 Capital celebrated its 
orgies. 

As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise 
and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered, in 
some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the 
native land of machinism, in England. For 30 years, however, 
the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely 
nominal. Parliament passed 5 Labour Laws between 1802 and 
1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for their car- 
rying out, for the requisite officials, &amp;c. 3 



1 "It is certainly much to be regretted that any class of persons should 
toil 12 hours a day, which, including the time for their meals and for going 
to and returning from their work, amounts, in fact, to 14 of the 24 hours.... 
Without entering into the question of health, no one will hesitate, I think, 
to admit that, in a moral point of view, so entire an absorption of the time 
of the working-classes, without intermission, from the early age of 13, and 
in trades not subject to restriction, much younger, must be extremely pre- 
judicial, and is an evil greatly to be deplored.... For the sake, therefore, of 
public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, and of giving the great 
body of the people a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to be desired 
that in all trades some portion of every working-day should be reserved for 
rest and leisure." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Dec, 
1841.") 

2 See "Judgment of Mr. J. H. Otway, Belfast. Hilary Sessions, County 
Antrim, 1860." 

3 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois 
king, that the one Factory Act passed during his reign, that of March 22nd, 
1841, was never put in force. And this law only dealt with child-labour. 
It fixed 8 hours a day for children between 8 and 12, 12 hours for children 
between 12 and 16, &amp;c, with many exceptions which allow night-work even 
for children 8 years old. The supervision and enforcement of this law are, 
in a country where every mouse is under police administration, left to the 
good-will of the amis du commerce. Only since 1853, in one single department — 



THE WORKING-DAY 279 

They remained a dead Letter. "The fact is, that prior to the 
Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all night, 
all day, or both ad libitum." 1 

A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from 
the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, and 
silk factories. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of 
capital than the history of the English Factory Acts from 1833 
to 1864. 

The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working-day to 
be from half-past five in the morning to half-past eight in the 
evening, and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is law- 
ful to employ young persons (i.e., persons between 13 and 18 years 
of age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual 
young person should work more than 12 hours in any one day, 
except in certain cases especially provided for. The 6th section 
of the Act provided: "That there shall be allowed in the course 
of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to 
every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The 
employment of children under 9, with exceptions mentioned 
later, was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 
was limited to 8 hours a day, night-work, i.e., according to this 
Act, work between 8.30 p. m. and 5.30 a. m., was forbidden for 
all persons between 9 and 18. 

The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the 
freedom of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as they 
called it, "the freedom of labour," that they created a special 
system in order to prevent the Factory Acts from having a con- 
sequence so outrageous. 

"The great evil of the factory system as at present con- 
ducted," says the first report of the Central Board of the Com- 
mission of June 28th, 1833, "has appeared to us to be that it en- 
tails the necessity of continuing the labour of children to 
the utmost length of that of the adults. The only remedy for 
this evil, short of the limitation of the labour of adults, which 
would, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is 
sought to be remedied, appears to be the plan of working 
double sets -of children." . . . Under the name of System 
of Relays, this "plan" was therefore carried out, so that, e.g., 

the Departement du Nord— has a paid government inspector been appoint- 
ed. Not less characteristic of the development of French society, generally, 

the fact, that Louis Philippe's law stood solitary among the all-em- 

icing mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848. 
i ^Report of Tnsp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, p. 50. 



is 
bracin 



280 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

from 5.30 a. m. until 1.30 in the afternoon, one set of children 
between 9 and 13, and from 1.30 p. m. to 8.30 in the evening 
another set were "put to," &amp;c. 

In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the 
most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children's labour 
passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet 
further gilded for them. Parliament decreed that after March 
1st, 1834, no child under 11, after March 1st, 1835, no child. un- 
der 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no child under 13, was to 
work more than eight hours in a factory. This "liberalism," 
so full of consideration for "capital," was the more noteworthy 
as, Dr. Farre, Sir A. Carlisle, Sir B. Brodie, Sir G. Bell, Mr. 
Guthrie, &amp;c, in a word, the most distinguished physicians and 
surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before 
the House of Commons, that there was danger in delay. 
Dr. Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. "Legisla- 
tion is necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in 
which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e., 
the factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of 
inflicting it." 

That same "reformed" Parliament, which in its delicate con- 
sideration for the manufacturers, condemned children under 13, 
for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory 
Hell, on the other hand, in the Emancipation Act, which also 
administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from 
the outset, to work any negro slave more than 45 hours a week. 

But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agita- 
tion that went on for several years. It turned chiefly on the age of 
those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' 
work, and were subject to a certain amount of compulsory 
education. According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of 
childhood ended at 10, or at the outside, at 11. The more 
nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of 
the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly raged 
the mob of manufacturers. They managed, in fact, to intimidate 
the government to such an extent that in 1835 it proposed to 
lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. In the 
meantime the pressure from without grew more threatening. 
Courage failed the House of Commons. It refused to throw chil- 
dren of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for more than 
8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operation. It 
remained unaltered until June, 1844. 

In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, 



THE WORKING-DAY 281 

first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the factory 
inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility of 
putting the Act into force. As the law of 1833 left it optional 
with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.30 a. m. to 
8.30 p. m., to make every "young person," and "every child" 
begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at any mo- 
ment they liked, and also permitted them to assign to dif- 
ferent persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen 
soon discovered a new "system of relays," by which the labour- 
horses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly 
re-harnessed at changing stations. We do not pause longer on 
the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. 
But this much is clear at the first glance: that this system 
annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in 
the letter. How could factory inspectors, with this complex 
book-keeping in respect to each individual child or young 
person, enforce the legally determined work-time and the 
granting of the legal meal-times? In a great many of the 
factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again un- 
punished. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844), 
the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any 
control under the newly invented relay system. * In the mean- 
time, however, circumstances had greatly changed. The factory 
hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours' Bill their 
economic, as they had made the Charter their political, 
election-cry. Some of the manufacturers, even, who had man- 
aged their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, 
overwhelmed Parliament with memorials on the immoral com- 
petition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or 
more fortunate local circumstances, enabled to break the law. 
Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might 
give the rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and 
political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change 
of front and of speech towards the workpeople. They had 
entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and 
needed the workers to help them to victory. They promised, 
therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the enact- 
ment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade millennium. 2 Thus 
they still less dared to oppose a measure intended only to make 
the law of 1833 a reality. Threatened in thier holiest interest, 



1 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1849, p. 6. 

2 "Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1848, p. 98. 



282 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic in- 
dignation against the "nefarious practices" 1 of their foes. 

This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 
7th, 1844. It came into effect on September lbth, 1844. It 
places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the 
women over 18. They were placed in every respect on the 
same footing as the young persons, their work-time limited to 
twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &amp;c. For the first 
time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and 
officially the labour of adults. In the Factory Report of 1844- 
1845, it is said with irony: "No instances have come to my 
knowledge of adult women having expressed any regret at 
their rights being thus far interfered with." 2 The working-time 

of children under 13 was reduced to 6y, and in certain circum- 
stances to 7 hours a-day. 3 

To get rid of the abuses of the "spurious relay system," the 
law established besides others the following important regula- 
tions: — "That the hours of work of children and young persons 
shall be reckoned from the time when any child or young per- 
son shall begin to work in the morning." So that if A, e.g., be- 
gins work at 8 in the morning, and B at 10, B's work-day must 
nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. "The time shall be reg- 
ulated by a public clock," for example, the nearest railway clock, 
by which the factory clock is to be set. The occupier is to hang 
up a "legible" printed notice stating the hours for the beginning 
and ending of work and the times allowed for the several meals. 
Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again em- 
ployed after 1 p. m. The afternoon shift must therefore consist 
of other children than those employed in the morning. Of the hour 
and a half for meal-times, "one hour thereof at the least shall 
be given before three of the clock in the afternoon. . . . and 
at the same period of the day. No child or young person shall 
be employed more than five hours before 1 p. m. without an in- 
terval for meal-time of at least 30 minutes. No child or young 
person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in any 
room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.e., at meal- 
times] carried on," &amp;c. 

1 Leonard Horner uses the expression "nefarious practices" in his 
official reports. ("Report of Insp. of Fact.," 31st October, 1859, p. 7.) 

2 "Rept.," &amp;c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. 15. 

8 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not 
work day after day, but only on alternate days. In the main, this clause re- 
mained inoperative. 



THE WORKING-DAY 283 

It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military 
uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, 
pauses of the work, were not at all the products of Parliamen- 
tary fancy. They developed gradually out of circum- 
stances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. 
Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation by the 
State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. One of their 
first consequences was that in practice the working-day 
of the adult males in factories became subject to the same 
limitations, since in most processes of production the co-opera- 
tion of the children, young persons, and women is indispen- 
sable. On the whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 
to 1847, the 12 hours' working-day became general and 
uniform in all branches of industry under the Factory Act. 

The manufacturers, however, did not allow this "progress" 
without a compensating "retrogression." At their instigation 
the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploit- 
able children from 9 to 8, in order to assure that additional sup- 
ply of factory children which is due to capitalists, according to 
divine and human law. 1 

The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history 
of England. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties 
on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the 
guiding star of legislation; in a word, the arrival of the mil- 
lennium. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist 
movement and the 10 hours' agitation reached their highest 
point. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. 
Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Free- 
traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' 
Bill, struggled for so long, went through Parliament. 

The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on 
July 1st, 1847, there should be a preliminary shortening of the 
working-day for "young persons" (from 13 to 18), and all fe- 
males to 11 hours, but that on May 1st, 1848, there should be 
a definite limitation of the working-day to 10 hours. In other 
respects, the Act only amended and completed the Acts of 1833 
and 1844. 

Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order 
to hinder the Act from coming into full force on May 1st, 1848. And 

1 "As a reduction in their hours of work would cause a larger number 
(of children) to be employed, it was thought that the additional supply 
of children from 8 to 9 years of age would meet the increased demand" 
(1. c, p. 13). 



284 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the workers themselves, under the pretence that they had been 
taught by experience, were to help in the destruction of their 
own work. The moment was cleverly chosen. "It must be remem- 
bered, too, that there has been more than two years of great suf- 
fering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47) among 
the factory operatives, from many mills having worked short 
time, and many being altogether closed. A considerable 
number of the operatives must therefore be in very narrow cir- 
cumstances; many, it is to be feared, in debt; so that it might 
fairly have been presumed that at the present time they would 
prefer working the longer time, in order to make up for past 
losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their furniture out of pawn, 
or replace that sold, or to get a new supply of clothes for them- 
selves and their families." 1 

The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of 
these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 10%. 
This was done, so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the 

new Free-trade era. Then followed a further reduction of 8-^-% 

as soon as the working-day was shortened to 11, and a reduc- 
tion of double that amount as soon as it was finally shortened 
to 10 hours. Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a 
reduction of wages of at least 25% took place. 2 Under such fa- 
vourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory 
workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. Neither 
lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. But all 
was in vain. Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which 
workpeople were made to complain of "their oppression by the 
Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral examina- 
tion, that their signatures had been extorted from them. "They 
felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act." 3 
But if the manufacturers did not succeed in making the work- 
people speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked all the 
louder in press and Parliament in the name of the workpeople. 



1 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. 16. 

2 "f found that men who had been getting 10s. a week, had had Is. 
taken off for a reduction in the rate of 10 per cent., and Is. 6d. off the re- 
maining 9s. for the reduction in time, together 2s. 6d., and notwithstand- 
ing this, many of them said they would rather work 10 hours." 1. c. 

' "'Though I signed it [the petition], I said at the time I was putting 
my hand to a wrong thing.' 'Then why did you put your hand to it?' 'Because 
I should have been turned off if I had refused.' Whence it would appear 
that this petitioner felt himself 'oppressed,' but not exactly by the Factory 
Act." I. c, p. 102. 



THE WORKING-DAY £85 



They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary 
commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruth- 
lessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to their humani- 
tarian crotchet. This manoeuvre also failed. Factory Inspector 
Leonard Horner conducted in his own person, and through his 
sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories 
of Lancashire. About 70% of the workpeople examined declared 
in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 11, 
and an altogether insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. 1 

Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males 
work 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as the 
best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of 
hearts. But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard Horner 
was again to the fore. The majority of the "over-timers" de- 
clared: "They would much prefer working ten hours for 
less wages, but that they had no choice; that so many were 
out of employment (so many spinners getting very low wages 
by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that 
if they refused to work the longer time, others would immedi- 
ately get their places, so that it was a question with them of 
agreeing to work the longer time, or of being thrown out of em- 
ployment altogether." 2 

The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and 
the Ten Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. But mean- 
while the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were 
imprisoned, and whose organisation was dismembered, had 
shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own 
strength. Soon after this the June insurrection in Paris and 
its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continent, 
all fractions of the ruling classes, landlords and capitalists, 
stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and 
Free-traders, government and opposition, priests and freethink- 
ers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry 
for the salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and 
Society. The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, 



1 p. 17, I. c. In Mr. Horner's district 10,270 adult male labourers were 
thus examined in 181 factories. Their evidence is to be found in the appendix 
to the Factory Reports for the half-year endi ng October 1848. These exami- 
nations furnish valuable material in other connexions also. 

* 1. c. See the evidence collected by Leonard Horner himself, Nos. 
69, 70, 71, 72, 92, 93, and that collected by Sub-Inspector A., Nos. 51, 52, 
58, 59, 62, 70, of the Appendix. One manufacturer, too, tells the plain 
truth. See No. 14, and No. 265, I. c. 



286 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

placed under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. The 
manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves. 
They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours' 
Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833 
had aimed at restricting in some measure the "free" exploita- 
tion of labour-power. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in minia- 
ture, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, 
a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the rebel capitalist 
risked nothing except the skin of his "hands." 

To understand that which follows we must remember that 
the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three in 
force so far as the one did not amend the other: that not one 
of these limited the working-day of the male worker over 18, 
and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a. m. to 8.30 p. m. 
had remained the legal "day," within the limits of which at 
first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons and 
women had to be performed under the prescribed conditions. 

The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a 
part of, in many cases half of, the young persons and women 
employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring 
the almost obsolete night-work. The Ten Hours' Act, they cried, 
leaves no other alternative. * 

Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. Let 
us hear the Factory Inspectors. "Since the restriction of the 
hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although 
they have not yet practically gone the whole length, that suppos- 
ing the hours of work to be from 9 a. m. to 7 p. m. they fulfil 
the provisions of the statutes by allowing an hour before 9 a. m. 
and half an hour after 7 p. m. [for meals]. In some cases they 
now allow an hour, or half an hour for dinner, insisting at the 
same time, that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour 
and a half in the course of the factory working-day." 2 The manu- 
facturers maintained therefore that the scrupulously strict pro- 
visions of the Act of 1844 with regard to meal-times only gave 
the operatives permission to eat and drink before coming into, 
and after leaving the factory— i.e., at home. And why should 
not the workpeople eat their dinner before 9 in the morning? 
The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed meal- 
times "must be in the interval during the working-hours, and 



1 Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1848, pp 133, 134. 
* Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1848, p. 47. 



THE WORKING-DAY 287 



that it will not be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, 
from 9 a. m. to 7 p. m., without any interval." 1 

After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its 
revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of 1844, 
and was therefore legal. 

The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 

1 p. m. of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been employed 

before noon. But it did not regulate in any way the 6— 

hours' work of the children whose work-time began at 12 mid- 
day or later. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, 

be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour; from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, 

\ 

2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3— hours; in all, the le- 

1 
gal 6^ hours. Or better still. In order to make their work 

coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p. m., 
the manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the 
afternoon; they could then keep them in the factory without 
intermission till 8.30 in the evening. "And it is now expressly 
admitted that the practice exists in England from the desire 
of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more than 
10 hours a-day, to keep the children at work with male adults 
after all the young persons and women have left, and 
until 8.30 p. m. if the factory-owners choose." 2 Workmen 
and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds, 
but Capital answered: 

"My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, 
The penalty and forfeit of my bond." 

In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Com- 
mons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July 15th, 
1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this "practice" in 257 
factories. 3 Still, this was not enough. The lynx eye of Capi- 
tal discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours' work 
before mid-day without a pause of at least 30 minutes for re- 
freshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after mid- 
day. Therefore, it claimed and obtained the enjoyment not only 
of making children of 8 drudge without intermission from 2 to 
8.30 p. m., but also of making them hunger during that time. 



Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 130 

Reports, &amp;c, I. c, p 142. 

Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. 5, 6. 



288 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

"Ay, his heart, 

So says the bond." l 

This Shylock-clinging to the letter of the law of 1844, so far 
as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead up to an open 
revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of 
"young persons and women." It will be remembered that the 
abolition of the "false relay system" was the chief aim and 
object of that law. The masters began their revolt with the sim- 
ple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which pro- 
hibited the ad libitum use of young persons and women in such 
short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employer chose, were 
"comparatively harmless" so long as the work-time was fixed at 
12 hours. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were a "grievous 
hardship." 2 They informed the inspectors in the coolest manner 
that they should place themselves above the letter of the law, 
and re-introduce the old system on their own account. 3 They 
were acting in the interests of the ill-advised operatives them- 
selves, "in order to be able to pay them higher wages." "This was 
the only possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours' 
Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain." "Perhaps it may 
be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system; 
but what of that? Is the great manufacturing interest of this 
country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some 
little trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories?" 4 

All these shifts naturally were of no avail. The Factory 
Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. But soon such a cloud 
of dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed the 
Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a circular of August 
5th, 1848, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay informations 



1 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its 
undeveloped form. In the code which the influence of the slave-owners, shortly 
before the outbreak of the American Civil War, imposed on the territory of 
New Mexico, it is said that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has 
bought his labour-power, "is his (the capitalist's) money." The same view 
was current among the Roman patricians. The money they had advanced 
to the plebeian debtor had been transformed via the means of subsistence 
into the flesh and blood of the debtor. This "flesh and blood" were, therefore, 
"their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tables. Linguet's hypoth- 
esis that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyond the 
Tiber, banquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as undecided as that of Daumer 
on the Christian Eucharist. 

2 Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1848, p. 28. 

3 Thus, among others, Philanthropist Ashworth to .Leonard Horner, 
in a disgusting Quaker letter. (Reports, &amp;c, April, 1849, p. 4.) 

* 1. c, p. 140. 



THE WORKING-DAY 289 



against mill-owners for a breach of the letter of the Act, or for 
employment of young persons by relays in cases in which there 
is no reason to believe that such young persons have been actually 
employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law." 
Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. Stuart allowed the so-called 
relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day throughout 
Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old. The English 
Factory Inspectors, on the other hand, declared that the Home 
Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and 
continued their legal proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion. 

But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the 
Courts, in this case the country magistrates— Gobbett's "Great 
Unpaid" — acquitted them? In these tribunals, the masters 
sat in judgment on themselves. An example. One Eskrigge, 
cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, &amp; Co., had laid 
before the Factory Inspector of his district the scheme of a re- 
lay system intended for his mill. Receiving a refusal, he at 
first kept quiet. A few months later, an individual named 
Robinson, also a cotton-spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at 
all events related to Eskrigge, appeared before the borough ma- 
gistrates of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical 
plan of relays invented by Eskrigge. Four Justices sat, among 
them three cotton-spinners, at their head this same inevitable 
Eskrigge. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of 
opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for Eskrigge. 
Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system 
at once into his own factory. l Of course, the composition of this 
tribunal was in itself a violation of the law. 2 These judicial 
farces, exclaims Inspector Howell, "urgently call for a remedy- 
either that the law should be so altered as to be made to conform 
to these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less 
fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the law 
. . . when these cases are brought forward. I long for a stipen- 
diary magistrate." 3 

The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of 
the Act of 1848 absurd. But the Saviours of Society would not 



1 Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. 21, 22 Cf like examples 
ibid. pp. 4, 5. ,,«,,_, 

2 By I. and II. Will. IV., ch. 24, s. 10, known as Sir John Hobhouse s 
Factory Act, it was forbidden to any owner of a cotton-spinning or weaving 
mill, or the father, son, or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the 
Peace in any inquiries that concerned the Factory Act. 

3 I. c. 



290 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. Leonard Hor- 
ner reports, "Having endeavoured to enforce the Act . . . 
by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and having 
been supported by the magistrates in one case only. ... I con- 
sidered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law. 
That part of the Act of 1884 which was framed for securing uni- 
formity in the hours of work, ... is thus no longer in force in 
my district (Lancashire). Neither have the sub-inspectors or 
myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill 
working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not 
working more than 10 hours a-day. ... In a return of the 30th 
April, ... of mill-owners working by shifts, the number 
amounts to 114, and has been for some time rapidly increasing. 

1 
In general, the time of working the mill is extended to 13 y hours, 

from 6 a. m. to 7— p. m., ... in some instances it amounts 

1 1 

to 15 hours, from 5— a. m. to 8— p. m." 1 Already, in December, 

1848, Leonard Horner had a list of 65 manufacturers and 29 over- 
lookers who unanimously declared that no system of supervi- 
sion could, under this relay system, prevent enormous over-work. 2 
Now, the same children and young persons were shifted from the 
spinning-room to the weaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from 
one factory to another. 3 How was it possible to control a system 
which, "under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans 
for shuffling 'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting 
the hours of work and of rest for different individuals through- 
out the day, so that you may never have one complete set of 
hands working together in the same room at the same time." 4 
But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so- 
called relay system was an offspring of capitalistic fantasy 
such as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of "Courtes Seances," 
has never surpassed, except that the "attraction of labour" was 
changed into the attraction of capital. Look, for example, at 
those schemes of the masters which the "respectable" press 
praised as models of "what a reasonable degree of care and 
method can accomplish." The personnel of the workpeople was 



J Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 5. 
2 Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1849, p. 6. 
8 Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 21 
• Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1848, p 95. 



THE WORKING-DAY 291 

sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which them- 
selves constantly changed and rechanged their constituent 
parts. During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged 
in the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then 
pushed him out again, to drag him into the factory and to thrust 
him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in scat- 
tered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of him until the 
full 10 hours' work was done. As on the stage, the same per- 
sons had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the differ- 
ent acts. But as an actor during the whole course of the play be- 
longs to the stage, so the operatives, during 15 hours, belonged 
to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming. 
Thus the hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, 
which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to the 
brothel. At every new trick that the capitalist, from day to day, 
hit upon for keeping his machinery going 12 or 15 hours with- 
out increasing the number of his hands, the worker had to swallow 
his meals now in this fragment of time, now in that. At the time 
of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out that the work- 
ing mob petitioned in the hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages 
for 10 hours' work. Now they reversed the medal. They paid 10 
hours' wages for 12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power. 1 
This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation 
of the 10 hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, 
perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full 10 years, dur- 
ing the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached to the operatives, 
by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and pence, that with free 
importation of corn, and with the means possessed by English 
industry, 10 hours' labour would be quite enough to enrich the 
capitalists. 2 This revolt of capital, after two years was at last 
crowned with victory by a decision of one of the four highest 
Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in a 
case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the 
manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense of the Act 
of 1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that ren- 
dered it meaningless. "By this decision, the Ten Hours' Act was 



1 See Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 6, and the detailed expla- 
nation of the "shifting system," by Factory Inspectors Howell and Saunders, 
in "Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1848." See also the petition to the Queen 
from the clergy of Ashton and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the 
"shift system." 

2 Cf. for example, "The Factory Question and the Ten Hours Bill." 
By R. H. Greg, 1837. 



292 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

abolished." 1 A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid 
of using the relay system for young persons and women, now took 
it up heart and soul. 2 

But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed 
at once a revulsion. The workpeople had hitherto offered a 
passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. They 
now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in threatening 
meetings. The pretended Ten Hours' Act, was thus simple hum- 
bug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed! The Factory 
Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antago- 
nism of classes had arrived at an incredible tension. Some of the 
masters themselves murmured: "On account of the contradictory 
decisions of the magistrates, a condition of things altogether ab- 
normal and anarchical obtains. One law holds in Yorkshire, another 
in Lancashire; one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its 
immediate neighbourhood. The manufacturer in large towns could 
evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts could not find 
the people necessary for the relay system, still less for the shifting 
of hands from one factory to another," &amp;c. And the first birthright 
of capital is equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists. 

Under these circumstances a compromise between masters 
and men was effected that received the seal of Parliament in 
the additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. The working- 

day for "young persons and women," was raised from 10 to lOy 

hours for the first five days of the week, and was shortened to 1— 

on the Saturday. The work was to go on between 6 a. m. and 6 

p. m., 3 with pauses of not less than 1— hours for meal-times, 

these meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for all, 
and conformably to the conditions of 1844. By this an end was 
put to the relay system once for all. 4 For children's labour, the 
Act of 1844 remained in force. 



1 F. Engels: "The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the "iNeue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Politisch-cekonomische Revue." Edited by K. Marx. April number, 
1850, p. 13.)Thesame "high" Court of Justice discovered, during the Ameri- 
can Civil War, a verbal ambiguity which exactly reversed the meaning ol 
the law against the arming of pirate ships. 

2 Rep., &amp;c, for 30th April, 1850. 

8 In winter, from 7 a. m to 7 p. m. may be substituted. 

4 "The present law (of 1850) was a compromise whereby the employed 
surrendered the benefit of the Ten Hours' Act for the advantage of one uni- 
form period for the commencement and termination of the labour of those 
whose labour is restricted." (Reports, &amp;.C., for 30th April, 1852, p. 14.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 293 

One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself 
special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat. 
These were the silk manufacturers. In 1833 they had howled 
out in threatening fashion, "if the liberty of working children 
of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop their 
works." x It would be impossible for them to buy a sufficient num- 
ber of children over 13. They extorted the privilege they de- 
sired. The pretext was shown on subsequent investigation to be 
a deliberate lie. 2 It did not, however, prevent them, during 10 
years, from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the blood of lit- 
tle children who had to be placed upon stools for the performance 
of their work. 3 The Act of 1844 certainly "robbed" them of the 

"liberty" of employing children under 11 longer than 6— hours 

a day. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege 
of working children between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of 
annulling in their case the education made compulsory for all 
other factory children. This time the pretext was "the delicate 
texture of the fabric in which they were employed, requiring a 
lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction 
to these .factories." 4 The children were slaughtered out-and-out 
for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the 
horned cattle for the sake of their hide and tallow. At length, in 
1850, the privilege granted in 1844, was limited to the depart- 
ments of silk-twisting and silk-winding. But here, to make amends 
to capital bereft of its "freedom," the work-time for children from 

11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10— hours. Pretext: "Labour in 

silk mills was lighter than in mills for other fabrics, and less 
likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health." 5 Official 
medical inquiries proved afterwards that, on the contrary, "the 
average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts, and 
amongst the female part of the population is higher even than 
it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." 6 Despite the protests 



1 Reports, &amp;c, for Sept.. 1844, p. 13. 

2 1. c. 

3 1. c. 

a "Reports, &amp;c, ior 31st Oct., 1846, " p. 20. 

5 Reports, &amp;c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. 26. 

6 1. c. p. 27. On the whole the working population, subject to the Fac- 
tory Act, has greatly improved physically. All medical testimony agrees on 
this point, and personal observation at different times has convinced me of 



294 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief 
continues to this hour. 1 

The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a. m. to 
8.30 p. m., into the 12 hours from 6 a. m. to 6 p. m. for "young 
persons and women" only. It did not, therefore, affect children 

who could always be employed for half an hour before and 2 — 

hours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did 
1 



not exceed 



6-^- hours. Whilst the bill was under discussion, 



the 



Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infa- 
mous abuses due to this anomaly. To no purpose. In the background 
lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the 
working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children. 
The experience of the three following years showed that such an 
attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult 



it. Nevertheless, and exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the 
first years of their life, the official reports of Dr. Greenhow show the unfa- 
vourable health condition of the manufacturing districts as compared with 
"agricultural districts of normal health." As evidence, take the following 
table from his 1861 report: — 



^J 








„_, a 




3.S 

n 






6° 


3 

-CT3 

&lt;• bo 


« 




2&lt;o 

&lt;- o 




z&lt;§ 




5 
S • 


&lt;U W 3 


v£~* 


Name of District. 


•2T 


g. w 5 




« a o 

*^ U (9 

a&gt; &lt;« 3 
2— c 


ath-ra 
Imona 
ns per 
les. 




ath-ra 
Imona 
ns per 
males. 


*j « eo 
g« 3 


■C 3 

c o 


j) ra w 


&lt;V 3 C ro 




CD 3 C &lt;u 


«E« 


— o 


ChSS 


QAwS 




QiV.5&amp; 


Pnfe 6 


WO 


14.9 


598 


Wigan 


644 


18.0 


Cotton 


42.6 


708 


Blackburn 


734 


34.9 


Do. 


37.3 


547 


Halifax 


564 


20.4 


Worsted 


41.9 


611 


Bradford 


603 


30.0 


Do. 


31.0 


691 


Macclesfield 


804 


26.0 


Silk 


14.9 


588 


Leek 


705 


17.2 


Do. 


36.6 


721 


Stoke-upon-Trent 


665 


19.3 


Earthenware 


30.4 


726 


Woolstanton 

Eight healthy agricultural 


727 


13.9 


Do. 




305 


districts 


340 







1 It is well known with what reluctance the English "Free-traders'* 
gave up the protective duty on the silk manufacture. Instead of the protec- 
tion against French importation, the absence of protection to English fac- 
tory children now serves their turn. 



THE WORKING-DAY 295 

male operatives. The Act of 1850 was therefore finally completed 
in 1853 by forbidding the "employment of children in the morn- 
ing before and in the evening after young persons and women." 
Henceforth with a few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regu- 
lated the working-day of all workers in the branches of industry 
that come under it. 1 Since the passing of the first Factory Act 
half a century had elapsed. 2 

Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original 
sphere in the "Printworks' Act of 1845." The displeasure with 
which capital received this new "extravagance" speaks through 
every line of the Act. It limits the working-day for children from 
8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a. m. and 10 p. m., 
without any legal pause for meal-times. It allows males over 13 
to be worked at will day and night. 3 It is a Parliamentary abor- 
tion. 4 

However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in 
those great branches of industry which form the most character- 
istic creation of the modern mode of production. Their wonderful 
development from 1853 to 1860, hand-in-hand with the physical 
and moral regeneration of the factory workers, struck the most 
purblind. The masters from whom the legal limitation and regula- 
tion had been wrung step by step after a civil war of half a century, 
themselves referred ostentatiouslv to the contrast with the branches 



1 During 1859 and 1860, the zenith years of the English cotton indus- 
try, some manufacturers tried, by the decoy bait of higher wages for over- 
time, to reconcile the adult male operatives to an extension of the working- 
day. The hand-mule spinners and self-actor minders put an end to the exper- 
iment by a petition to their employers in whicl they say, "Plainly speaking, 
our lives are to us a burthen; and, while we are confined to the mills nearly 
two days a iceek more than the other operatives of the country, we feel like 
helots in the land, and that we are perpetuating a system injurious to ourselves 
and future generations.... This, therefore, is to give you most respectful 
notice that when we commence work again after the Christmas and New 
Year's holidays, we shall work 60 hours per week, and no more, or from six 
to six, with one hour and a half out." (Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1860, 
p. 30.) 

2 On the means that the wording of this Act afforded tor its violation 
cf. the Parliamentary Return "Factories Regulation Act" (6th August, 1859), 
and in it Leonard Horner's "Suggestions for amending the Factory Acts to 
enable the Inspectors to prevent illegal working, now becoming very 
prevalent." 

3 "Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been em- 
ployed from 6 a. m. to 9 p. m. during the last half year in my district." (Re- 
ports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1857, p. 39.) 

4 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure, both with reier- 
ence to its educational and protective provisions." (Reports, &amp;c ., for 31st 
October, 1862, p 52.) 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



of exploitation still "free." 1 The Pharisees of "Political Economy" 
now proclaimed the discernment of the necessity of a legally 
fixed working-day as a characteristic new discovery of their "sci- 
ence." 2 It will be easily understood that after the factory magnates 
had resigned themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, 
the power of resistance of capital gradually weakened, whilst at 
the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew with 
the number of its allies in the classes of society not immediately 
interested in the question. Hence the comparatively rapid advance 
since 1860. 

The dye-works and bleach-works all came under the Factory 
Act of 1850 in I860; 3 lace and stocking manufactures in 1861. 

In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the 
employment of children (1863) the same fate was shared by 
the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), 
lucifer-matches, percussion-caps, cartridges, carpets, fustian- 
cutting, and many processes included under the name of "finish- 
ing." In the year 1863 bleaching in the open air 4 and baking 

1 Thus, e.g., E. Potter in a letter to the Times of March 24th, 1863. 
The Times reminded him of the manufacturers' revolt against the Ten 
Hours' Bill. 

2 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of 
Tooke's "History of Prices." Is it a scientific advance to make cowardly 
concessions to public opinion? 

3 The Act passed in 1860, determined that, in regard to dye and bleach- 
works, the working-day should be fixed on August 1st, 1861, provision- 
ally at 12 hours, and definitely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10-^- 

hours for ordinary days, and 7-s- for Saturday. Now, when the fatal year, 

1862, came, the old farce was repeated. Besides, the manufacturers petitioned 
Parliament to allow the employment of young persons and women for 
12 hours during one year longer. "In the existing condition of the trade (the 
time of the cotton famine), it was greatly to the advantage of the operatives 
to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill to this 
effect had been brought in, "and it was mainly due to the action of the oper- 
ative bleachers in Scotland that the bill was abandoned " (Reports, &amp;c, 
for 31st October, 1862, pp. 14-15.) Thus defeated by the very workpeople, 
in whose name it pretended to speak, Capital discovered, with the help of 
lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, drawn up, like all the Acts of Parlia- 
ment for the "protection of labour," in equivocal phrases, gave them a pretext 
to exclude from its working the calenderers and finishers. English jurispru- 
dence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned in the Court of Common 
Pleas this piece of pettifogging. "The operatives have been greatly disap- 
pointed... they have complained of over-work, and it is greatly to be regretted 
that the clear intention of the legislature should have failed by reason of a 
faulty definition." (1. c, p. 18.) 

A The "open-air bleachers" had evaded the law of 1860, by means of 
the lie that no women worked at it in the night. The lie was exposed by the 



THE WORKING-DAY 297 



were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the la- 
bour of young persons and women during the night-time (from 
8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employ- 
ment of journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening 
and 5 in the morning were forbidden. We shall return to the later 
proposals of the same Commission, which threatened to deprive 
of their "freedom" all the important branches of English Industry, 
with the exception of agriculture, mines, and the means of trans- 
port. * 

Factory Inspectors, and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions from 
the operatives, bereft of its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which 
bleaching in the open-air was reported to take place. In this aerial bleaching, 
drying-rooms were used at temperatures of from 90° to 100° Fahrenheit, 
in which the work was done for the most part by girls. "Cooling" is the techni- 
cal expression for their occasional escape from the drying-rooms into the fresh 
air. "Fifteen girls in stoves. Heat from 80° to 90° for linens, and 100° and up- 
wards for cambrics. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up in a small room about 
10 feet square, in the centre of which is a close stove. The girls stand round 
the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics rapidly 
for the ironers. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. If busy, 
they work till 9 or 12 at night for successive nights." (Reports, &amp;c, for 31st 
October, 1862, p. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are allowed 
for cooling, but if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get 
soiled from perspiration, they are allowed to go out for a few minutes.... My 
experience, which is considerable, in treating the diseases of stove workers, 
compels me to express the opinion that their sanitary condition is by no means 
so high as that of the operatives in a spinning factory (and Capital, in its 
memorials to Parliament, had painted them as floridly healthy, after the 
manner of Rubens). The diseases most observable amongst them are phthisis, 
bronchitis, irregularity of uterine functions, hysteria in its most aggravated 
forms, and rheumatism. All of these, I believe, are either directly or indi- 
rectly induced by the impure, overheated air of the apartments in which 
the hands are employed, and the want of sufficient comfortable clothing to 
protect them from the cold, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going to their 
homes." (1. c, pp. 56-57.) The Factory Inspectors remarked on the supple- 
mentary law of 1860, torn from these open-air bleachers: "The Act has not 
only failed to afford that protection to the workers which it appears to 
offer, but contains a clause ... apparently so worded that, unless persons are 
detected working after 8 o'clock at night they appear to come under no pro- 
tective provisions at all, and if they do so work, the mode of proof is so 
doubtful that a conviction can scarcely follow." (1. c. p. 52.) "To all intents 
and purposes, therefore, as an Act for any benevolent or educational purpose, 
it is a failure; since it can scarcely be called benevolent to permit, which is 
tantamount to compelling, women and children to work 14 hours a day with 
or without meals, as the case may be, and perhaps for longer hours than 
these, without limit as to age, without reference to sex, and without regard 
to the social habits of the families of the neighbourhood, in which such works 
(bleaching and dyeing) are situated." (Reports, &amp;c, for 30th April, 1863, 
p. 40.) 

1 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 1866, when I wrote the above passages, 
a re-action has again set in. 



298 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

SECTION 7.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. 

RE-ACTION OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS 

ON OTHER COUNTRIES 

The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus- 
value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific end and 
aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart 
from any changes in the mode of production, which may arise 
from the subordination of labour to capital. He will remember 
that as far as we have at present gone, only the independent la- 
bourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for 
himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with 
the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the one 
hand, modern industry; on the other, the labour of those who are 
physically and legally minors, play important parts, the former 
was to us only a special department, and the latte,r only a special- 
ly striking example of labour exploitation. Without, however, 
anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from 
the mere connexion of the historic facts before us, it follows: 

First. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless 
extension of the working-day, is first gratified in the industries 
earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, 
in those first creations of the modern mode of production, cot- 
ton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. The changes in 
the material mode of production, and the corresponding changes 
in the social relations of the producers 1 gave rise first to an 
extravagance beyond all bounds, and then in opposition to this, 
called forth a control on the part of Society which legally limits, 
regulates, and makes uniform the working-day and its pauses. 
This control appears, therefore, during the first half of the 
nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation. 2 As soon 
as this primitive dominion of the new mode of production was con- 
quered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many 
other branches of production been made to adopt the same factory 
system, but that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods, 
such as potteries, glass-making, &amp;c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, 
like baking, and, finally, even that the so-called domestic indus- 

1 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has 
been the result of the relative situation in which they have been placed." 
(Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 113.) 

2 "The employments, placed under restriction, were connected with 
the manufacture of textile fabrics by the aid of steam or water-power. There 
were two conditions to which an employment must be subject to cause it 
to be inspected, viz., the use of steam or water-power, and the manufacture 
of certain specified fibres." (Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1864, p. 8.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 299 



tries, such as nail-making, 1 had long since fallen as completely 
under capitalist exploitation as the factories themselves. Legisla- 
tion was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its ex- 
ceptional character, or where, as in England, it proceeds after 
the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in which 
work was done to be a factory. 2 

Second. The history of the regulation of the working-day in 
certain branches of production, and the struggle still going on 
in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that 
the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free" vendor of his la- 
bour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a cer- 
tain stage, succumbs without any power of resistance. The crea- 
tion of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a pro- 
tracted civil war, more or less dissembled, between the capitalist 
class and the working-class. As the contest takes place in the arena 
of modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that indus- 
try — England. 3 The English factory workers were the champions, 
not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, 
as their theorists were the first to throw down the gauntlet to the 
theory of capital. 4 Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure, 

1 On the condition of so-called domestic industries, specially valuable 
materials are to be found in the latest reports of the Children's Employment 
Commission. 

2 "The Acts of last Session (1864) ... embrace a diversity of occupa- 
tions, the customs in which differ greatly, and the use of mechanical power 
to give motion to machinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, 
as formerly, to constitute, in legal phrase, a 'Factory.'" (Reports, &amp;c, for 
31st October, 1864, p. 8.) 

3 Belgium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of 
this movement. Even in the coal and metal mines, labourers of both sexes, 
and all ages, are consumed, in perfect "freedom," at any period, and through 
any length of time. Of every 1,000 persons employed there, 733 are men, 
88 women, 135 boys, and 44 girls under 16; in the blast-furnaces, &amp;c, of 
every 1,000, 668 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, and 85 girls under 16. Add to 
this the low wages for the enormous exploitation of mature and immature 
labour-power. The average daily pay for a man is 2s. 8d., for a woman, Is. 

8d., for a boy, Is. 2-^- d. As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared with 
1850, nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, 
iron, &amp;c. 

4 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of 
a limitation of the working-day in theory, but actually introduced the 10 
hours' day into his factory at New Lanark. This was laughed at as a commu- 
nistic Utopia; so were his "Combination of children's education with pro- 
ductive labour" and the Co-operative Societies of working-men, first called 
into being by him. To-day, the first Utopia is a Factory Act, the second figures 
as an official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third is already being used 
as a cloak for reactionary humbug. 



300 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that 
they inscribed "the slavery of the Factory Acts" on the banner 
which they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect 
freedom of labour." 1 

France limps slowly behind England. The February revolu- 
tion was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours' law, 2 
which is much more deficient than its English original. For all 
that, the French revolutionary method has its special advan- 
tages. It once for all commands the same limit to the working-day 
in all shops and factories without distinction, whilst English 
legistation reluctantly yields to the pressure of circumstances, 
now on this point, now on that, and is getting lost in a hopelessly 
bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments. 3 On the other 
hand, the French law proclaims as a principle that which in 
England was only won in the name of children, minors, and 
women, and has been only recently for the first time claimed as 
a general right. 4 



1 Ure: "French translation, Philosophie des Manufactures." Paris, 
1836, Vol. II., pp. 39, 40, 67, 77, &amp;c. 

2 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at 
Paris, 1855, it is stated: "The French law, which limits the length of daily 
labour in factories and workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to 
definite fixed hours. For children's labour only the work-time is prescribed 
as between 5 a. m. and 9 p. m. Therefore, some of the masters use the right 
which this fatal silence gives them to keep their works going, without inter- 
mission, day in, day out, possibly with the exception of Sunday. For this 
purpose they use two different sets of workers, of whom neither is in the work- 
shop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the establishment lasts 
day and night. The law is satisfied, but is humanity?" Besides "the destruc- 
tive influence of night-labour on the human organism," stress is also 
laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night 
in the same badly-lighted workshops." 

3 "For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within 
the same curtilage, is at the same time a bleacher and dyer under the 
Bleaching and Dyeing Works Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, 
and a finisher under the Factory Act." (Report of Mr. Baker, in Reports, 
&amp;c, for October 31st, 1861, p. 20.) After enumerating the different provisions 
of these Acts, and the complications arising from them, Mr. Baker says: 
"It will hence appear that it must be very difficult to secure the execution 
of these three Acts of Parliament where the occupier chooses to evade 
the law." But what is assured to the lawyers by this is law-suits. 

4 Thus the Factory Inspectors at last venture to say: "These objections 
(of capital to the legal limitation of the working-day) must succumb before 
the broad principle of the rights of labour... There is a time when the mas- 
ter's right in his workman's labour ceases, and his time becomes his own, 
even if there were no exhaustion in the question." (Reports, &amp;c., for 31st 
Oct., 1862, p. 54.) 



THE WORKING-DAY 301 

In the United States of North America, every independent 
movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery dis- 
figured a part of the Republic. Labour cannot emancipate it- 
self in the white skin where in the black it is branded. But out 
of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. The first fruit 
of the Civil War was the eight hours' agitation, that ran with the 
seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the 
Pacific, from New England to California. The General Congress 
of Labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared: "The first 
and great necessity of the present, to free the labour of this country 
from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by which eight 
hours shall be the normal working-day in all States of the Ameri- 
can Union. We are resolved to put forth all our strength until 
this glorious result is attained." 1 At the same time, the Congress 
of the International Working Men's Association at Geneva, on 
the proposition of the London General Council, resolved that "the 
limitation of the working-day is a preliminary condition without 
which all further attempts at improvement and emancipation must 
prove abortive . . . the Congress proposes eight hours as the le- 
gal limit of the working-day." 

Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of 
the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the conditions 
of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English 
Factory Inspector, R. J. Saunders: "Further steps towards a 
reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope 
of success, unless the hours of labour be limited, and the pre- 
scribed limit strictly enforced." 2 

It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the 
process of production other than he entered. In the market he 
stood as owner of the commodity "labour-power" face to face 
with other owners of commodities, dealer against dealer. The con- 
tract by which he sold to the capitalist his Labour-power proved, 
so to say, in black and white that he disposed of himself freely. 



1 "We, the workers of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour 
required under the present system is too great, and that, tar from leaving 
the worker time for rest and education, it plunges him into a condition ot 
servitude but little better than slavery. That is why we decide that 8 hours 
are enough for a working-day, and ought to be legally recognised as enough; 
why we call to our help that powerful lever, the press; ... and why we shall 
consider all those that refuse us this help as enemies of the reform oi labour 
and of the rights of the labourer." (Resolution of the Working Men ot Dun- 
kirk, New York State, 1866.) 

2 Reports, &amp;c, for Oct., 1848, p 112. 



302 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The bargain concluded, it is discovered that he was no "free agent," 
that the time for which he is free to sell his labour-power is the 
time for which he is forced to sell it, 1 that in fact the vampire 
will not lose its hold on him "so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, 
a drop of blood to be exploited." 2 For "protection" against "the ser- 
pent of their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together, 
and, as a class, compel tne passing of a law, an all-powerful 
social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling, 
by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their fam- 
ilies into slavery and death. 3 In place of the pompous cata- 
logue of the "inalienable rights of man" comes the modest Magna 
Charta of a legally limited working-day, which shall make clear 
"when the time which the worker sells is ended, and when his 
own begins." 4 Quantum mutatus ab illo! 



1 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) 
have afforded, moreover, incontrovertible proof of the fallacy of the asser- 
tion so often advanced, that operatives need no protection, but may be consid- 
ered as free agents in the disposal of the only property which they possess— 
the labour of their hands and the sweat of their brows." (Reports, &amp;c, for 
April 30th, 1850, p. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may be termed) even in a free 
country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it." (Reports, &amp;c, for 
October 31st, 1864, p. 34.) "To permit, which is tantamount to compelling... 
to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &amp;c. (Repts., &amp;c, for April 
30th, 1863, p. 40.) 

* Friedrich Engels, 1. c, p. 5. 

3 The 10 Hours' Act has, in the branches of industry that come under 
it, "put an end to the premature decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." 
(Reports, &amp;c, for 31st Oct., 1859, p. 47.) "Capital (in factories) can never be 
employed in keeping the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without 
certain injury to the health and morals of the labourers employed; and they 
are not in a position to protect themselves." (1. c, p. 8.) 

4 "A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between 
the worker's own time and his master's. The worker knows now when that 
which he sells is ended, and when his own begins; and by possessing a sure 
foreknowledge of this, is enabled to pre-arrange his own minutes for his own 
purposes." (1. c, p. 52.) "By making them masters of their own time (the 
Factory Acts) have given them a moral energy which is directing them to 
the eventual possession of political power" (1. c, p. 47). With suppressed 
irony, and in very well weighed words, the Factory Inspectors hint that the 
actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality natural to 
a man who is a mere embodiment of capital, and that it has given him time 
for a little "culture." "Formerly the master had no time for anything but 
money; the servant had no time for anything but labour" (1. c, p. 48). 



303 



CHAPTER XI 
RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, 
and therefore the part of the working-day necessary for the 
reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed 
to be given, constant magnitudes. 

This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time 
given of the surplus-value that the individual labourer furnishes 
to the capitalist in a definite period of time. If, e.g., the neces- 
sary labour amounts to 6 hours daily, expressed in a quantum of 
gold=3 shillings, then 3s. is the daily value of one labour-power 
or the value of the capital advanced in the buying of one labour- 
power. If, further, the rate of surplus-value be =100%, this vari- 
able capital of 3s. produces a mass of surplus-value of 3s., or the 
labourer supplies daily a mass of surplus-labour equal to 6 
hours. 

But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in 
money of the total value of all the labour-powers that he employs 
simultaneously. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value 
of one labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers 
employed. With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the mag- 
nitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of 
labourers employed simultaneously. If the daily value of one la- 
bour-power =3s., then a capital of 300s. must be advanced in 
order to exploit daily 100 labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order 
to exploit daily n labour-powers. 

In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily 
value of one labour-power, produce a daily surplus-value of 3s., 
a variable capital of 300s. will produce a daily surplus-value of 
300s., and one of n times 3s. a daily surplus-value of nx3s. 
The mass of the surplus-value produced is therefore equal to the 
surplus-value which the working-day of one labourer supplies 



304 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

multiplied by the number of labourers employed. But as further 
the mass of surplus-value which a single labourer produces, the 
value of labour-power being given, is determined by the rate of 
the surplus-value, this law follows: the mass of the surplus-value 
produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced, 
multiplied by the rate of surplus-value; in other words: it is de- 
termined by the compound ratio between the number of labour- 
powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the 
degree of exploitation of each individual labour-power. 

Let the mass of the surplus-value be S, the surplus-value 
supplied by the individual labourer in the average day s, the 
variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individual 
labour-power v, the sum total of the variable capital V, the val- 
ue of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation — 

/ surp us- a our \ an j t ^ e number of labourers employed n; 
\ necessary labour/ r J 

we have: 




It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average 
labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed by 
a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. There are exception- 
al cases in which the surplus-value produced does not increase in 
proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then the 
value of the labour-power does not remain constant. 

In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, there- 
fore, the decrease of one factor may be compensated by the in- 
crease of the other. If the variable capital diminishes, and at 
the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the same 
ratio, the mass of surplus-value produced remains unaltered. 
If on our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., 
in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if the rate of sur- 
plus-value amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s. yields 
a surplus-value of 150s. or of 100 x 3 working-hours. If the rate 
of surplus-value doubles, or the working-day, instead of being 
extended from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same 
time variable capital is lessened by half, and reduced to 150s., 
it yields also a surplus-value of 150s. or 50 x 6 V working-hours. 
Diminution of the variable capital may therefore be compensated 



RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 305 

by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of labour- 
power, or the decrease in the number of the labourers employed 
by a proportionate extension of the working-day. Within certain 
limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is 
independent of the supply of labourers. 1 On the contrary, a fall 
in the rate of surplus-value leaves unaltered the mass of the 
surplus-value produced, if the amount of the variable capital, or 
number of the labourers employed, increases in the same pro- 
portion. 

Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of 
labourers employed, or of the amount of variable capital advanced, 
by a rise in the rate of surplus-value, or by the lengthening of the 
working-day, has impassable limits. Whatever the value of labour- 
power may be, whether the working-time necessary for the main- 
tenance of the labourer is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a la- 
bourer can produce, day in, day out, is always less than the value 
in which 24 hours of labour are embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. 
is the money expression for 24 hours of realised labour. In our for- 
mer assumption, according to which 6 working-hours are daily nec- 
essary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace 
the value of the capital advanced in its purchase, a variable capi- 
tal of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers at a rate of surplus-value 
of 100% with a 12 hours' working-day, produces daily a surplus- val- 
ue of 1,500s. or of 6x500 working-hours. A capital of 300s. that em- 
ploys 100 labourers a day with a rate of surplus-value of 200% or 
with a working-day of 18 hours, produces only a mass of surplus-val- 
ue of 600s. 'or 12x100 working-hours; and its total value-product, 
the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the surplus- 
value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1 ,200s. or 24 x 100 
working-hours. The absolute limit of the average working-day — 
this being by nature always less than 24 hours— sets an absolute 
limit to the compensation of a reduction of variable capital by a 
higher rate of surplus-value, or of the decrease of the number of 
labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour- 
power. This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up of 
many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to be worked out later 
on) of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labour- 
ers employed by it, or its variable constituent transformed into 
labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to produce 

1 This elementary law appears to be unknown to the vulgar economists, 
who, upside-down Archimedes, in the determination of the market-price 
of labour by supply and demand, imagine they have found the fulcrum 
by means of which, not to move the world, but to stop its motion. 



306 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the greatest possible mass of surplus-value. On the other hand, if 
the mass of labour-power employed, or the amount of variable 
capital, increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of 
surplus-value, the mass of the surplus-value produced, falls. 
A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the 
surplus-value produced, by the two factors: rate of surplus-value 
and amount of variable capital advanced. The rate of surplus- 
value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value 
of labour-power, or the amount of necessary working-time being 
given, it is self-evident that the greater the variable capital, the 
greater would be the mass of the value produced and of the surplus- 
value. If the limit of the working-day is given, and also the limit of 
its necessary constituent, the mass of value and surplus-value that 
an individual capitalist produces, is clearly exclusively dependent 
on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. But this, under the 
conditions supposed above, depends on the mass of labour-power, 
or the number of labourers whom he exploits, and this number in 
its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital ad- 
vanced. With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of la- 
bour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced vary 
directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. Now 
we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. One 
part he lays out in means of production. This is the constant part 
of his capital. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. 
This part forms his variable capital. On the basis of the same mode 
of social production, the division of capital into constant and va- 
riable differs in different branches of production, and within the 
same branch of production, too, this relation changes with changes 
in the technical conditions and in the social combinations of the 
processes of production. But in whatever proportion a given capi- 
tal breaks up into a constant and a variable part, whether the lat- 
ter is to the former as 1 : 2 or 1 : 10 or 1 : x, the law just laid down 
is not affected by this. For, according to our previous analysis, the 
value of the constant capital re-appears in the value of the product, 
but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly cre- 
ated value-product. To employ 1,000 spinners, more raw material, 
spindles, &amp;c, are, of course, required, than to employ 100. The 
value of these additional means of production however, may rise, 
fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has no influence on 
the process of creation of surplus-value by means of the labour- 
powers that put them in motion. The law demonstrated above now, 
therefore, takes this form: the masses of value and of surplus-val- 
ue produced by different capitals — the value of labour-power be- 



RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 307 

ing given and its degree of exploitation being equal — vary di- 
rectly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capi- 
tals , i.e. , as their constituents transformed into living labour-power. 

This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appear- 
ance. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner, who, reckoning the 
percentage on the whoie of his applied capital, employs much 
constant and little variable capital, does not, on account of this, 
pocket less profit or surplus-value than a baker, who relatively sets 
in motion much variable and little constant capital. For the so- 
lution of this apparent contradiction, many intermediate terms are 
as yet wanted, as from the standpoint of elementary algebra many 
intermediate terms are wanted to understand that -y may represent 
an actual magnitude. Classical economy, although not formulating 
the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary conse- 
quence of the general law of value. It tries to rescue the law from 
collision with contradictory phenomena by a violent abstraction. 
It will be seen later 1 how the school of Ricardo has come to grief 
over this stumbling-block. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has 
really learnt nothing," here as everywhere sticks to appearances in 
opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. In oppo- 
sition to Spinoza, it believes that "ignorance is a sufficient reason." 

The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a so- 
ciety, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective work- 
ing-day. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and the 
average working-day of a labourer is 10 hours, the social working- 
day consists of ten million hours. With a given length of this work- 
ing-day, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the 
mass of surplus-value can only be increased by increasing the num- 
ber of labourers, i.e., of the labouring population. The growth of 
population here forms the mathematical limit to the production 
of surplus-value by the total social capital. On the contrary, with 
a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possi- 
ble lengthening of the working-day. 2 It will, however, be seen in 
the following chapter that this law only holds for the form of sur- 
plus-value dealt with up to the present. 

From the treatment of the production of surplus- value, so far, 
it follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at pleasure 



1 Further particulars will be given in Book IV. 

2 "The Labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, 
say ten hours a day of a million of people, or ten million hours.... Capital 
has its boundary of increase. This boundary may, at any given period, be 
attained in the actual extent of economic time employed." ("An Essay on 
the Political Economy of Nations." London, 1821, pp. 47, 49.) 



308 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

transformable into capital. To effect this transformation, in fact, 
a certain minimum of money or of exchange-value must be pre-sup- 
posed in the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodi- 
ties. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single 
labour-power, employed the whole year through, day in, day out, 
for the production of surplus-value. If this labourer were in posses- 
sion of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a 
labourer, he need not work beyond the time necessary for the re- 
production of his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. He would, 
besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 work- 
ing-hours. The capitalist, on the other hand, who makes him do, 
besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an addi- 
tional sum of money for furnishing the additional means of produc- 
tion. On our supposition, however, he would have to employ two 
labourers in order to live, on the surplus-value appropriated daily, 
as well as, and no better than a labourer, i.e., to be able to satis- 
fy his necessary wants. In this case the mere maintenance of life 
would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but 
this latter is implied in capitalist production. That he may live 
only twice as well as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half 
of the surplus-value produced into capital, he would have to 
raise, with the number of labourers, the minimum of the capital 
advanced 8 times. Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work 
himself, participate directly in the process of production, but he is 
then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a "small mas- 
ter." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the 
capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time during which he 
functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified capital, to the appro- 
priation and therefore control of the labour of others, and to the sell- 
ing of the products of this labour. 1 The guilds of the middle ages 



1 "The farmer cannot rely on his own labour, and if he does, I will 
maintain that he is a loser by it. His employment should be a general atten- 
tion to the whole: his thresher must be watched, or he will soon lose his wages 
in corn not threshed out; his mowers, reapers, &amp;c, must be looked after; 
he must constantly go round his fences; he must see there is no neglect; 
which would be the case if he was confined to any one spot." ("An Inquiry 
into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of 
Farms, &amp;c. By a Farmer." London, 1773, p. 12.) This book is very inter- 
esting. In it the genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmer," as 
he is explicitly called, may be studied, and his self-glorification at the 
expense of the small farmer who has only to do with bare subsistence, be 
noted. "The class of capitalists are from the first partially, and they become 
ultimately completely, discharged from the necessity of the manual labour." 
("Textbook of Lectures on the Political Economy of Nations. By the Rev. 
Richard Jones." Hertford, 1852. Lecture III., p. 39.) 



RATE AND MASS OP SURPLUS-VALUE 309 

therefore tried to prevent by force the transformation of the mas- 
ter of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the number of labour- 
ers that could be employed by one master within a very small max- 
imum. The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into 
a capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced 
for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle ages. 
Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law 
discovered by Hegel (in his "Logic"), that merely quantitative 
differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative changes. * 

The minimum of the sum of value that the individual posses- 
sor of money or commodities must command, in order to meta- 
morphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the different stages 
of development of capitalist production, and is at given stages dif- 
ferent in different spheres of production, according to their special 
and technical conditions. Certain spheres of production demand, 
even at the very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of 
capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single individuals. 
This gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in 
France in the time of Colbert, and as in many German states up to 
our own epoch; partly to the formation of societies with legal mo- 
nopoly for the exploitation of certain branches of industry and com- 
merce, the fore-runners of our modern joint-stock companies. 2 

Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital 
acquired the command overlabour, i.e., over functioning labour- 
power or the labourer himself. Personified capital, the capitalist 
takes care that the labourer does his work regularly and with the 
proper degree of intensity. 

Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which 
compels the working-class to do more work than the narrow round 
of its own life-wants prescribes. As a producer of the activity of 



1 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked 
out by Laurent and Gerhardt rests on no other law. (Addition to 3rd Edi- 
tion.) For the explanation of this statement, which is not very clear to non- 
chemists, we remark that the author speaks here of the homologous series 
of carbon compounds, first so named by G. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of 
which has its own general algebraic formula. Thus the series of paraffins: 
c n H 2n-f2 &gt; that of the norma i alcohols: C n H 2n+2 0; of the normal fatty 
acids: C n H 2n O 2 and many others. In the above examples, by the simply 
quantitative addition of CH 2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively differ- 
ent body is each time formed. On the share (overestimated by Marx) of Lau- 
rent and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp, "Ent 
wicklung der Chemie." Munchen, 1873, pp. 709, 716, and Schorlemmer, "The 
Rise and Development of Organic Chemistry." London, 1879, p. 54.— F. E. 

2 Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions: "The Company Mo- 
nopolia." 



310 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

others, as a pumper-out of surplus-labour and exploiter of labour- 
power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds, recklessness 
and efficiency, all earlier systems of production based on directly 
compulsory labour. 

At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the tech- 
nical conditions in which it historically finds it. It does not, there- 
fore, change immediately the mode of production. The produc- 
tion of surplus-value— in the form hitherto considered by us — by 
means of simple extension of the working-day, proved, therefore, 
to be independent of any change in the mode of production itself. 
It was not less active in the old-fashioned bakeries than in the 
modern cotton factories. 

If we consider the process of production from the point of view 
of the simple labour-process, the labourer stands in relation to 
the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as 
the mere means and material of his own intelligent productive 
activity. In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins as his simple ob- 
ject of labour. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. But it 
is different as soon as we deal with the process of production from 
the point of view of the process of creation of surplus- value. The 
means of production are at once changed into means for the absorp- 
tion of the labour of others. It is now no longer the labourer that em- 
ploys the means of production, but the means of production that em- 
ploy the labourer. Instead of being consumed by him as material ele- 
ments of his productive activity, they consume him as the ferment 
necessary to their own life-process, and the life-process of capital 
consists only in its movement as value constantly expanding, con- 
stantly multiplying itself. Furnaces and workshops that stand idle 
by night, and absorb no living labour, are "a mere loss" to the capi- 
talist. Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute lawful claims 
upon the night-labour of the workpeople. The simple transforma- 
tion of money into the material factors of the process of produc- 
tion, into means of production, transforms the latter into a title and 
a right to the labour and surplus-labour of -others. An example 
will show, in conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to and 
characteristic of capitalist production, this complete inversion of 
the relation between dead and living labour, between value and 
the force that creates value, mirrors itself in the consciousness of 
capitalists. During the revolt of the English factory lords between 
1848 and 1850, "the head of one of the oldest and most respectable 
houses in the West of Scotland, Messrs. Carlile Sons &amp; Co., of the 
linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has 
now existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, 



RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 3H 

and four generations of the same family have conducted it". . . 
this "very intelligent gentleman" then wrote a letter 1 in the Glas- 
gow Daily Mail of April 25th, 1849, with the title, "The relay sys- 
tem," in which among other things the following grotesquely naive 
passage occurs: "Let us now. . . see what evils will attend the lim- 
iting to 10 hours the working of the factory. . . . They amount to 
the most serious damage to the mill-owner's prospects and proper- 
ty. If he (i.e., his "hands") worked 12 hours before, and is limited 
to 10, then every 12 machines or spindles in his establishment 
shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be 
valued only as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from 
the value of every factory in the country." 2 

To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the 
accumulated capitalistic qualities of "four generations," the value 
of the means of production, spindles, &amp;c, is so inseparably mixed 
up with their property, as capital, to expand their own value, and 
to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the unpaid labour of oth- 
ers, that the head of the firm of Carlile &amp; Co. actually imagines 
that if he sells his factory, not only will the value of the spindles 
be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of annexing surplus- 
value, not only the labour which is embodied in them, and is nec- 
essary to the production of spindles of this kind, but also the sur- 
plus-labour which they help to pump out daily from the brave 
Scots of Paisley, and for that very reason he thinks that with the 
shortening of the working-day by 2 hours, the selling-price of 12 
spinning machines dwindles to that of 10! 



1 Reports of Tnsp. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. 59. 

2 1. c, p. 60. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in 
contrast to' the English Factory Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capi- 
talistic method of thinking, remarks expressly on this letter which he incor- 
porates in his report that it is "the most useful of the communications which 
any of the factory-owners working with relays have given to those engaged 
in the same trade, and which is the most calculated to remove the prejudices 
of such of them as have scruples respecting any change of the arrangement 
of the hours of work." 



312 



PAET IT 

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 



CHAPTER XII 
THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 

That portion of the working-day which merely produces an 
equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist for his labour-power, 
has, up to this point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, 
and such in fact it is, under given conditions of production and at 
a given stage in the economic development of society. Beyond 
this, his necessary labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue 
to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, &amp;c, hours. The rate of surplus-value and the 
length of the working-day depended on the magnitude of this pro- 
longation. Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, 
on the other hand, that the total working-day was variable. Now 
suppose we have a working-day whose length, and whose apportion- 
ment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. Let 
the whole line a c, a b — c represent, for example, a working- 
day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of necessary labour, and 
the portion b c 2 hours of surplus-labour. How now can the produc- 
tion of surplus-value be increased, i.e., how can the surplus-la- 
bour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any prolonga- 
tion of a c? 

Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable 
of prolongation, if not by extension beyond its end c, which is 
also the end of the working-day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing 
back its starting-point b in the direction of a. Assume that b' — 
b in the line a b' b c is equal to half of b c 

a b' — b c 

or to one hour's labour-time. If now, in a c, the working-day of 
12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b' c; the sur- 
plus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although 
the working-day remains as before at 12 hours. This extension of 
the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 Jiours to 3 hours, 
is, however, evidently impossible, without a simultaneous con- 



THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 313 

traction of the necessary labour-time from a b into a b', from 10 
hours to 9 hours. The prolongation of the surplus-labour would cor- 
respond to a shortening of the necessary labour; or a portion of 
the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for the labourer's 
own benefit, would be converted into labour-time for the benefit of 
the capitalist. There would be an alteration, not in the length of 
the working-day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and 
surplus labour-time. 

On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the sur- 
plus-labour is given, when the length of the working-day, and the 
value of labour-power, are given. The value of labour-power, 
i.e., the labour-time requisite to produce labour-power, deter- 
mines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that value. 
If one working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a 
day's labour-power be five shillings, the labourer must work 10 
hours a day, in order to replace the value paid by capital for his 
labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily 
necessary means of subsistence. Given the value of these means of 
subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; 1 and given the 
value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour- 
time is given. The duration of the surplus-labour, however, is ar- 
rived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total 
working-day. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it 
is not easy to see, how, under the given conditions, the surplus-la- 
bour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. No doubt, the 
capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shil- 
lings and sixpence or even less. For the reproduction of this value 
of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time would suf- 
fice; and consequently three hours of surplus-labour, instead of two, 
would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise 
from one shilling to eighteenpence. This result, however, would be 



1 The value of his average daily wages is determined by what the la- 
bourer requires "so as to live, labour, and generate." (Wm. Petty: "Political 
Anatomy of Ireland," 1672, p. 64.) "The price of Labour is always consti- 
tuted of the price of necessaries ... whenever ... the labouring man's wages 
will not, suitably to his low rank and station, as a labouring man, support 
such a family as is often the lot of many of them to have," he does not receive 
proper wages. (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 15.) "Le simple ouvrier, qui n'a que 
ses bras et son industrie, n'a rien qu'autant qu'il parvient a vendre a d'autres 
sa peine... En tout genre de travail il doit arriver, et il arrive en effet, que 
le salaire de l'ouvrier se borne a ce qui lui est necessaire pour lui procurer sa 
subsistance." (Turgot, "Reflexions, &amp;c," CEuvres, ed. Daire t. I, p. 10.) "The 
price of the necessaries of life is, in fact, the cost of producing labour." 
(Malthus, "Inquiry into, &amp;c, Rent," London, 1815, p. 48, note). 



314 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

obtained only by lowering the wages of the labourer below the val- 
ue of his labour-power. With the four shillings and sixpence which 
he produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the nec- 
essaries of life than before, and consequently the proper reproduc- 
tion of his labour-power is crippled. The surplus-labour would in 
this case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal lim- 
its; its domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of 
the domain of necessary labour-time. Despite the important part 
which this method plays in actual practice, we are excluded from 
considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all commodi- 
ties, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full val- 
ue. Granted this, it follows that the labour-time necessary for the 
production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, 
cannot be lessened by a fall in the labourer's wages below the val- 
ue of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this value itself. Giv- 
en the length of the working-day, the prolongation of the surplus- 
labour must of necessity originate in the curtailment of the neces- 
sary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the former. In the 
example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour- 
power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary 
labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours 
to nine, and in order that the surplus-labour may consequently be 
prolonged from two hours to three. 

Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that 
the same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten 
hours, can now be produced in nine hours. But this is impossible 
without an increase in the productiveness of labour. For example, 
suppose a shoemaker, with given tools, makes in one working-day 
of twelve hours, one pair of boots. If he must make two pairs in the 
same time, the productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and 
this cannot be done, except by an alteration in his tools or in his 
mode of working, or in both. Hence, the conditions of production, 
i. e., his mode of production, and the labour-process itself, must be 
revolutionised. By increase in the productiveness of labour, we 
mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a 
kind as to shorten the labour-time socially necessary for the pro- 
duction of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of labour 
with the power of producing a greater quantity of use-value. 1 Hith- 



1 "Quando si perfezionano le arti, che non e altro che la scoperta di 
nuove vie, onde si possa compiere una manufattura con meno gente o (che 
e lo stesso) in minor tempo di prima." (Galiani, 1. c, p» 159.) "L'economie 
sur les frais de production ne peu done etre autre chose que l'economie sur 
a quantity de travail employe" pour produire." (Sismondi, "Etudes," t. I, p. 22.) 



THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 315 

erto in treating of surplus-value, arising from a simple prolonga- 
tion of the working-day, we have assumed the mode of production 
to be given and invariable. But when surplus-value has to be pro- 
duced by the conversion of necessary labour into surplus-labour, it 
by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour-process in 
the form under which it has been historically handed down, and then 
simply to prolong the duration of that process. The technical and 
social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of 
production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of 
labour can be increased. By that means alone can the value of la- 
bour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working-day 
necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened. 

The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working- 
day, I call absolute surplus-value. On the other hand, the surplus- 
value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, 
and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of 
the two components of the working-day, I call relative surplus- 
value. 

In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase 
in the productiveness of labour must seize upon those branches 
of industry, whose products determine the value of labour-power, 
and consequently either belong to the class of customary means of 
subsistence, or are capable of supplying the place of those means. 
But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quan- 
tity of labour which the labourer directly bestows upon that com- 
modity, but also by the labour contained in the means of produc- 
tion. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends, not only 
on the cobbler's labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, 
thread, &amp;c. Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also 
brought about by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and 
by a corresponding cheapening of commodities in those industries 
which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that 
form the material elements of the constant capital required for pro- 
ducing the necessaries of life. But an increase in the productiveness 
of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the 
necessaries of life, nor the means of production for such neces- 
saries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed. 

The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto 
fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent 
of that commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour- 
power. Shirts, for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, 
but are only one out of many. The totality of the necessaries of 
life consists, however, of various commodities, each the product of 



316 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a distinct industry; and the value of each of those commodities 
enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. This 
latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time neces- 
sary for its reproduction; the total decrease being the sum of all the 
different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and 
distinct industries. This general result is treated, here, as if it 
were the immediate result directly aimed at in each individual case. 
Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, 
by increasing the productiveness of labour, he by no means nec- 
essarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and shorten- 
ing, pro tanto, the necessary labour-time. But it is only in so far 
as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he assists in rais- 
ing the general rate of surplus-value. 1 The general and necessary 
tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of 
manifestation. 

It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the 
laws, immanent in capitalist production, manifest themselves in 
the movements of individual masses of capital, where they assert 
themselves as coercive laws of competition, and are brought home 
to the mind and consciousness of the individual capitalist as the di- 
recting motives of his operations. But this much is clear; a scien- 
tific .analysis of competition is not possible, before we have a con- 
ception of the inner nature of capital, just as the apparent motions 
of the heavenly bodies are not intelligible to any but him, who is 
acquainted with their real motions, motions which are not direct- 
ly perceptible by the senses. Nevertheless, for the better compre- 
hension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the 
following remarks, in which we assume nothing more than the re- 
sults we have already obtained. 

If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six 
shillings will be produced in a working-day of 12 hours. Suppose, 
that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are 
produced in these 12 hours. Let the value of the means of produc- 
tion used up in each article be sixpence. Under these circum- 
stances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the 
means of production, and sixpence for the value newly added in 
working with those means. Now let some one capitalist contrive 
to double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the work- 



1 "Let us suppose ... the products ... of the manufacturer are doubled 
by improvement in machinery ... he will be able to clothe his workmen by 
means of a smaller proportion of the entire return ... and thus his profit 
will be raised. But in no other way will it be influenced." (Ramsay. 1. c. pp. 
168, 169.) 



THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 317 

ing-day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12 such articles. The value of 
the means of production remaining the same, the value of each ar- 
ticle will fall to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the 
means of production and threepence for the value newly added by 
the labour. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day's 
labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and no more, 
which, however, is now spread over twice as many articles. Of 

1 1 

this value each article now has embodied in it^th, instead of^th, 

threepence instead of sixpence; or, what amounts to the same thing, 
only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is now 
added to the means of production while they are being transformed 
into each article. The individual value of these articles is now 
below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour- 
time than the great bulk of the same article produced under the 
average social conditions. Each article costs, on an average, one 
shilling, and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the al- 
tered mode of production it costs only ninepence, or contains only 

1— hours' labour. The real value of a commodity is, however, not 

its individual value, but its social value; that is to say, the real 
value is not measured by the labour-time that the article in each 
individual case costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially 
required for its production. If therefore, the capitalist who applies 
the new method, sells his commodity at its social value of one shil- 
ling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus 
realises an extra surplus-value of threepence. On the other hand, the 
working-day of 12 hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 
articles instead of 12. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of 
one working-day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the 
market must become twice as extensive. Other things being equal, 
his commodities can command a more extended market only by 
a diminution of their prices. He will therefore sell them above their 
individual but under their social value, say at tenpence each. 
By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny 
out of each. This augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, 
whether his commodities belong or not to the class of necessary 
means of subsistence that participate in determining the general 
value of labour-power. Hence, independently of this latter circum- 
stance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheap- 
en his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour. 
Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of 
surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour- 



318 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-la- 
bour. 1 Let the necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the val- 
ue of a day's labour-power to five shillings, the surplus labour- 
time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to one shilling. But 
the capitalist now produces 24 articles, which he sells at tenpence 
a-piece, making twenty shillings in all. Since the value of the 

means of production is twelve shillings, 14-p-of these articles mere- 
ly replace the constant capital advanced. The labour of the 12 
hours' working-day is represented by the remaining 9— articles. 

Since the price of the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles repre- 

3 
sent the necessary labour-time, and 3— articles the surplus-labour. 

The ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which un- 
der average social conditions was 5:1, is now only 5:3. The same 
result may be arrived at in the following way. The value of the 
product of the working-day of 12 hours is twenty shillings. Of this 
sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of the means of produc- 
tion, a value that merely re-appears. There remain eight shillings, 
which are the expression in money, of the value newly created dur- 
ing the working-day. This sum is greater than the sum in which 
average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of 
the latter labour are expressed by six shillings only. The excep- 
tionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it creates 
in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour 
of the same kind. (See Ch. I. Sect. 2. p. 44.) But our capitalist still 
continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a day's 
labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now 

work only 7-p- hours, in order to reproduce this value. His sur- 
o 

plus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2-r- hours, and the surplus- 
value he produces grows from one, into three shillings. Hence, the 
capitalist who applies the improved method of production, appro- 
priates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working-day, than 
the other capitalists in the same trade. He does individually, what 
the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative sur- 



1 "A man's profit does not depend upon his command of the produce 
of other men's labour, but upon his command of labour itself. If he can sell 
his goods at a higher price, while his workmen's wages remain unaltered, he 
is clearly benefited.... A smaller proportion of what he produces is sufficient 
to put that labour into motion, and a larger proportion 1 consequently re- 
mains for himself." ("Outlines of Pol. Econ." London, 1832, pp. 49, 50.) 



THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 319 

plus-value, do collectively. On the other hand, however, this extra 
surplus-value vanishes, so soon as the new method of production 
has become general, and has consequently caused the difference be- 
tween the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its 
social value to vanish. The law of the determination of value by la- 
bour-time, a law which brings under its sway the individual capi- 
talist who applies the new method of production, by compelling 
him to sell his goods under their social value, this same law, 
acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to 
adopt the new method. x The general rate of surplus-value is, there- 
fore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the in- 
crease in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those 
branches of production that are connected with, and has cheapened 
those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of subsist- 
ence, and are therefore elements of the value of labour-power. 
The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the produc- 
tiveness of labour. And so, too, is the value of labour-power, be- 
cause it depends on the values of commodities. Relative surplus- 
value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that productive- 
ness. It rises with rising and falls with falling productiveness. 
The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average so- 
cial working-day of 12 hours always produces the same new value, 
six shillings, no matter how this sum may be apportioned between 
surplus-value and wages. But if, in consequence of increased pro- 
ductiveness, the value of the necessaries of life fall, and the 
value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced from five shillings 
to three, the surplus-value increases from one shilling to three. 
Ten hours were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the 
labour-power; now only six are required. Four hours have 
been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus- 
labour. Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and 
constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in 
order to cheapen commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen 
the labourer himself. 2 



1 "If my neighbour by doing much with little labour, can sell cheap, 
I must contrive to sell as cheap as he. So that every art, trade, or engine, 
doing work with labour of fewer hands, and consequently cheaper, begets 
in others a kind of necessity and emulation, either of using the same art, 
trade, or engine, or of inventing something like it, that every maD may be 
upon the square, that no man may be able to undersell his neighbour." 
("The Advantages of the East India Trade to England." London, 1720, p. 67.) 

2 "In whatever proportion the expenses of a labourer are diminished, 
in the same proportion will his wages be diminished, if the restraints upon 
industry are at the same time taken off." ("Considerations Concerning Taking 



320 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the cap- 
italist. What alone interests him, is the surplus-value that dwells 
in it, and is realisable by sale. Realisation of the surplus-value nec- 
essarily carries with it the refunding of the value that was ad- 
vanced. Now, since relative surplus-value increases in direct pro- 
portion to the development of the productiveness of labour, while, 
on the other hand, the value of commodities diminishes in the same 
proportion; since one and the same process cheapens commodities, 
and augments the surplus-value contained in them; we have here 
the solution of the riddle: why does the capitalist, whose sole con- 
cern is the production of exchange-value, continually strive to 
depress the exchange-value of commodities? A riddle with which 
Quesnay, one of the founders of Political Economy, tormented his 
opponents, and to which they could give him no answer. "You 
acknowledge," he says, "that the more expenses and the cost of la- 
bour can, in the manufacture of industrial products, be reduced 
without injury to production, the more advantageous is such reduc- 
tion, because it diminishes the price of the finished article. And 
yet, you believe that the production of wealth, which arises from 
the labour of the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the 
exchange-value of their products." 1 

The shortening of the working-day is, therefore, by no means 
what is aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour is econo- 
mised by increasing its productiveness. 2 It is only the shorten- 
ing of the labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite 
quantity of commodities, that is aimed at. The fact that the work- 
man, when the productiveness of his labour has been increased, 



off the Bounty on Corn Exported," &amp;c, Lond., 1753, p. 7.) "The interest of 
trade requires, that corn and all provisions should be as cheap as possible; 
for whatever makes them dear, must make labour dear also ... in all coun- 
tries, where industry is not restrained, the price of provisions must affect 
the price of labour. This will always be diminished when the necessaries of 
life grow cheaper." (1. c, p. 3.) "Wages are decreased in the same proportion 
as the powers of production increase. Machinery, it is true, cheapens the nec- 
essaries of life, but it also cheapens the labourer." ("A Prize Essay on the 
Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." London, 1834, p. 27.) 

1 "lis conviennent que plus on peut, sans prejudice, epargner de frais 
ou de travaux dispendieux dans la fabrication des ouvrages des artisans, 
plus cette epargne est profitable par la diminution des prix de ces ouvrages. 
Cependant ils croient que la production de richesse qui resulte des travaux 
des artisans consiste dans l'augmentation de la valeur venale de leurs ou- 
vrages." (Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans," 
pp. 188, 189.) 

2 "Ces speculatcurs si economes du travail des ouvriers qu'il faudrait 
qu'ils payassent." (J.N. Bidaut: "Du Monopole qui s'etablit dans les arts 
industriels et le commerce." Paris, 1828, p. 13.) "The employer will be always 



THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 321 

produces, say 10 times as many commodities as before, and thus 
spends one-tenth as much labour-time on each, by no means pre- 
vents him from continuing to work 12 hours as before, nor from pro- 
ducing in those 12 hours 1,200 articles instead of 120. Nay, more, 
his working-day may be prolonged at the same time, so as to make 
him produce, say 1,400 articles in 14 hours. In the treatises, there- 
fore, of economists of the stamp of MacCulloch, Ure, Senior, and 
tutti quanti, we may read upon one page, that the labourer owes 
a debt of gratitude to capital for developing his productiveness, 
because the necessary labour-time is thereby shortened, and on the 
next page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in future 
for 15 hours instead of 10. The object of all development of the pro- 
ductiveness of labour, within the limits of capitalist production, 
is to shorten that part of the working-day, during which the work- 
man must labour for his own benefit, and by that very shortening, 
to lengthen the other part of the day, during which he is at liberty 
to work gratis for the capitalist. How far this result is also attaina- 
ble, without cheapening commodities, will appear from an exami- 
nation of the particular modes of producing relative surplus- 
value, to which examination we now proceed. 



on the stretch to economise time and labour." (Dugald Stewart: Works ed. 
by Sir. W. Hamilton. Edinburgh, v. viii., 1855. "Lectures on Polit. Econ.," 
p. 318.) "Their (the capitalists') interest is that the productive powers of 
the labourers they employ should be the greatest possible. On promoting 
that power their attention is fixed and almost exclusively fixed." (R. Jones: 
1. c, Lecture ILL) 



322 



CHAPTER XIII 
CO-OPERATION 

Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have alrea- 
dy seen, when each individual capital employs simultaneously a 
comparatively large number of labourers; when consequently the 
labour-process is carried on on an extensive scale and yields, rel- 
atively, large quantities of products. A greater number of labour- 
ers working together, at the same time, in one place (or, if you 
will, in the same field of labour), in order to produce the same sort 
of commodity under the mastership of one capitalist, constitutes, 
both historically and logically, the starting-point of capitalist 
production. With regard to the mode of production itself, manufac- 
ture, in its strict meaning, is hardly to be distinguished, in its ear- 
liest stages, from the handicraft trades of the guilds, otherwise 
than by the greater number of workmen simultaneously employed 
by one and the same individual capital. The workshop of the mediae- 
val master handicraftsman is simply enlarged. 

At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. We have 
shown that the surplus-value produced by a given capital is equal 
to the surplus-value produced by each workman multiplied by 
the number of workmen simultaneously employed. The number of 
workmen in itself does not affect, either the rate of surplus-value, 
or the degree of exploitation of labour-power. If a working-day of 
12 hours be embodied in six shillings, 1,200 such days will be 
embodied in 1,200 times 6 shillings. In one case 12 x 1,200 working- 
hours, and in the other 12 such hours are incorporated in the prod- 
uct. In the production of value a number of workmen rank merely 
as so many individual workmen; and it therefore makes no differ- 
ence in the value produced whether the 1,200 men work separately, 
or united under the control of one capitalist. 

Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place. 
The labour realised in value, is labour of an average social quality; 
is consequently the expenditure of average labour-power. Any 



CO-OPERATION 323 



average magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of 
separate magnitudes all of one kind, but differing as to quantity. 
In every industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, 
differs from the average labourer. These individual differences, or 
"errors" as they are called in mathematics, compensate one another, 
and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen are 
employed together. The celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund 
Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, based on his 
practical observations as a farmer; viz., that "in so small a platoon" 
as that of five farm labourers, all individual differences in the la- 
bour vanish, and that consequently any given five adult farm la- 
bourers taken together, will in the same time do as much work as 
any other five. 1 But, however that may be, it is clear, that the col- 
lective working-day of a large number of workmen simultaneously 
employed, divided by the number of these workmen, gives one day 
of average social labour. For example, let the working-day of each 
individual be 12 hours. Then the collective working-day of 12 men 
simultaneously employed, consists of 144 hours; and although the 
labour of each of the dozen men may deviate more or less from av- 
erage social labour, each of them requiring a different time for the 
same operation, yet since the working-day of each is one-twelfth 
of the collective working-day of 144 hours, it possesses the quali- 
ties of an average social working-day. From the point of view, 
however, of the capitalist who employs these 12 men, the working- 
day is that of the whole dozen. Each individual man's day is an 
aliquot part of the collective working-day, no matter whether the 
12 men assist one another in their work, or whether the connex- 
ion between their operations consists merely in the fact, that the 
men are all working for the same capitalist. But if the 12 
men are employed in six pairs, by as many different small 
masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether each of these 
masters produces the same value, and consequently whether he 
realises the general rate of surplus-value. Deviations would occur 



1 "Unquestionably, there is a good deal of difference between the value 
of one man's labour and that of another from strength, dexterity, and honest 
application. But I am quite sure, from my best observation, that any given 
five men will, in their total, afford a proportion of labour equal to any other 
five within the periods of life I have stated; that is, that among such five 
men there will be one possessing all the qualifications of a good workman, 
one bad, and the other three middling, and approximating to the first and 
the last. So that in so small a platoon as that of even five, you will find the 
full complement of all that five men can earn." (E. Burke, 1. c, pp. 15, 16.) 
Compare Quetelet on the average individual. 



324 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



in individual cases. If one workman required considerably more 
time for the production of a commodity than is socially necessary, 
the duration of the necessary labour-time would, in his case, sen- 
sibly deviate from the labour-time socially necessary on an aver- 
age; and consequently his labour would not count as average la- 
bour, nor his labour-power as average labour-power. It would ei- 
ther be not saleable at all, or only at something below the average 
value of labour-power. A fixed minimum of efficiency in all la- 
bour is therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capital- 
ist production provides the means of fixing this minimum. Nev- 
ertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although on 
the other hand the capitalist has to pay the average value of labour- 
power. Of the six small masters, one would therefore squeeze out 
more than the average rate of surplus-value, another less. The ine- 
qualities would be compensated for the society at large, but not for 
the individual masters. Thus the laws of the production of value are 
only fully realised for the individual producer, when he produces 
as a capitalist, and employs a number of workmen together, whose 
labour, by its collective nature, is at once stamped as average so- 
cial labour. * 

Even without an alteration in the system of working, the 
simultaneous employment of a large number of labourers effects a 
revolution in the material conditions of the labour-process. The 
buildings in which they work, the store-houses for the raw mate- 
rial, the implements and utensils used simultaneously or in turns 
by the workmen; in short, a portion of the. means of production, 
are now consumed in common. On the one hand, the exchange-val- 
ue of these means of production is not increased; for the exchange- 
value of a commodity is not raised by its use-value being consumed 
more thoroughly and to greater advantage. On the other hand, 
they are used in common, and therefore on a larger scale than be- 
fore. A room where twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be 
larger than the room of a single weaver with two assistants. But it 
costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons than to 
build ten to accommodate two weavers each; thus the value of the 
means of production that are concentrated for use in common on 
a large scale does not increase in direct proportion to the expan- 
sion and to the increased useful effect of those means. When con- 



1 Professor Roscher claims to have discovered that one needlewoman 
employed by Mrs. Roscher during two days, does more work than two needle- 
women employed together during one day. The learned professor should not 
study the capitalist process of production in the nursery, nor under circum- 
stances where the principal personage, the capitalist, is wanting. 



CO-OPERATION 325 



sumed in common, they give up a smaller part of their value to 
each single product; partly because the total value they part with 
is spread over a greater quantity of products, and partly because 
their value, though absolutely greater, is, having regard to their 
sphere of action in the process, relatively less than the value of 
isolated means of production. Owing to this, the value of a part of 
the constant capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of 
the fall, the total value of the commodity also falls. The effect is 
the same as if the means of production had cost less. The economy 
in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in 
common by a large number of workmen. Moreover, this character 
of being necessary conditions of social labour, a character that 
distinguishes them from the dispersed and relatively more costly 
means of production of isolated, independent labourers, or small 
masters, is acquired even when the numerous workmen assembled 
together do not assist one another, but merely work side by side. 
A portion of the instruments of labour acquires this social charac- 
ter before the labour-process itself does so. 

Economy in the use of the means of production has to be con- 
sidered under two aspects. First, as cheapening commodities, and 
thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power. Second- 
ly, as altering the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital ad- 
vanced, i.e., to the sum of the values of the constant and variable 
capital. The latter aspect will not be considered until we come to 
the third book, to which, with the object of treating them in their 
proper connexion, we also relegate many other points that relate 
to the present question. The march of our analysis compels this 
splitting up of the subject-matter, a splitting up that is quite in 
keeping with the spirit of capitalist production. For since, in this 
mode of production, the workman finds the instruments of labour 
existing independently of him as another man's property, economy 
in their use appears, with regard to him, to be a distinct operation, 
one that does not concern him, and which, therefore, has no con- 
nexion with the methods by which his own personal productiveness 
is increased. 

When numerous labourers work together side by side, wheth- 
er in one and the same process, or in different but connected proc- 
esses, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation. * 

Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the de- 
fensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentially different 
from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual 



"Concours de forces." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. c, p. 80.) 



326 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



cavalry or infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of 
the mechanical forces exerted by isolated workmen differs from the 
social force that is developed, when many hands take part simul- 
taneously in one and the same undivided operation, such as rais- 
ing a heavy weight, turning a winch, or removing an obstacle. * In 
such cases the effect of the combined labour could either not be pro- 
duced at all by isolated individual labour, or it could only be pro- 
duced by a great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. 
Not only have we here an increase in the productive power of the 
individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new 
power, namely, the collective power of masses. 2 

Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of many 
forces into one single force, mere social contact begets in most in- 
dustries an emulation and a stimulation of the animal spirits that 
heighten the efficiency of each individual workman. Hence it is 
that a dozen persons working together will, in their collective 
working-day of 144 hours, produce far more than twelve isolated 
men each working 12 hours, or than one man who works twelve 
days in succession. 3 The reason of this is that man is, if not as Aris- 
totle contends, a political, 4 at all events a social animal. 



1 "There are numerous operations of so simple a kind as not to admit 
a division into parts, which cannot be performed without the co-operation 
of many pairs of hands. I would instance the lifting of a large tree on to a 
wain ... everything, in short, which cannot be done unless a great many pairs 
of hands help each other in the same undivided employment and at the same 
time" (E. G. Wakefield: "A View of the Art of Colonisation." London, 1849, 
p. 168). 

2 "As one man cannot, and ten men must strain to lift a tou of weight, 
yet 100 men can do it only by the strength of a finger of each of them." 
(John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Golledge of Industry." London, 1696. 
p. 21.) 

8 "There is also" (when the same number of men are employed by one 
farmer on 300 acres, instead of by ten farmers with 30 acres a piece) "an ad- 
vantage in the proportion of servants, which will not so easily be under- 
stood but by practical men; for it is natural to say, as 1 is to 4, so are 3 
to 12: but this will not hold good in practice; for in harvest time and many 
other operations which require that kind of despatch by the throwing many 
hands together, the work is better and more expeditiously done: f. i. in har- 
vest, 2 drivers, 2 loaders, 2 pitchers, 2 rakers, and the rest at the rick, or 
in the barn, will despatch double the work that the same number of hands 
would do if divided into different gangs on different farms." ("An Inquiry 
into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size 
of Farms." By a Farmer. London, 1773, pp. 7, 8.) 

4 Strictly, Aristotle's definition is that man is by nature a town-cit- 
izen. This is quite as characteristic of ancient classical society as Franklin's 
definition of man, as a tool-making animal, is characteristic of Yankeedom. 



CO-OPERATION 327 



Although a number of men may be occupied together at the same 
time on the same, or the same kind of work, yet the labour of each, 
as a part of the collective labour, may correspond to a distinct 
phase of the labour-process, through all whose phases, in conse- 
quence of co-operation, the subject of their labour passes with great- 
er speed. For instance, if a dozen masons place themselves in a row, 
so as to pass stones from the foot of a ladder to its summit, each of 
them does the same thing; nevertheless, their separate acts form 
connected parts of one total operation; they are particular phases, 
which must be gone through by each stone; and the stones are thus 
carried up quicker by the 24 hands of the row of men than they 
could be if each man went separately up and down the ladder with 
his burden. 1 The object is carried over the same distance in a short- 
er time. Again, a combination of labour occurs whenever a build- 
ing, for instance, is taken in hand on different sides simultaneously; 
although here also the co-operating masons are doing the same, or 
the same kind of work. The 12 masons, in their collective working- 
day of 144 hours, make much more progress with the building than 
one mason could make working for 12 days, or 144 hours. The rea- 
son is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and eyes 
both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree, omnipresent. 
The various parts of the work progress simultaneously. 

In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point that 
the men do the same, or the same kind of work, because this, 
the most simple form of labour in common, plays a great part in 
co-operation, even in its most fully developed stage. If the work be 
complicated, then the mere number of the men who co-operate 
allows of the various operations being apportioned to different 
hands, and, consequently, of being carried on simultaneously. The 
time necessary for the completion of the whole work is thereby 
shortened. 2 



1 "On doit encore remarquer que cette division partielle de travail 
peut se faire quand meme les ouvriers sont occupes d'une meme besogne. 
Des macons par exemple, occupes a faire passer de mains en mains des bn- 
ques a un echafaudage superieur, font tous la meme besogne, et pourtant ll 
existe parmi eux une espece de division de travail, qui consiste en ce que 
chacun d'eux fait passer la brique par unespace donne et que tous ensemble 
la font parvenir beaucoup plus promptement a l'endroit marque qu lis ne 
le feraient si chacun d'eux portait sa brique separement jusqu a 1 echaiauaage 
superieur." (F. Skarbek: "Theorie des richesses sociales." Pans, 18.39, t. I, 
pp. 97, 98.) , , 

2 "Est-il question d'executer un travail complique, plusieurs choses 
doiveut etre faites simultanement. L'un en fait une pendant que I autre en 
fait une autre, et tous contribuent a l'effet qu'un seul homme n aurait pu 



328 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by 
the nature of the process, during which certain definite results 
must be obtained. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be shorn, 
or a field of wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity and qual- 
ity of the product depends on the work being begun and ended 
within a certain time. In these cases, the time that ought to be 
taken by the process is prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing. 
A single person cannot carve a working-day of more than, say 12 
hours, out of the natural day, but 100 men co-operating extend the 
working-day to 1,200 hours. The shortness of the time allowed for 
the work is compensated for by the large mass of labour thrown 
upon the field of production at the decisive moment. The comple- 
tion of the task within the proper time depends on the simultane- 
ous application of numerous combined working-days; the amount 
of useful effect depends on the number of labourers; this number, 
however, is always smaller than the number of isolated labourers 
required to do the same amount of work in the same period. 1 
It is owing to the absence of this kind of co-operation that, in the 
western part of the United States, quantities of corn, and in those 
parts of East India where English rule has destroyed the old com- 
munities, quantities of cotton, are yearly wasted. 2 

On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being car- 
ried on over an extended space; it is consequently imperatively 
called for in certain undertakings, such as draining, constructing 
dykes, irrigation works, and the making of canals, roads and rail- 
ways. On the other hand, while extending the scale of production, 
it renders possible a relative contraction of the arena. This contrac- 



produire. L'un rame pendant que l'autre tient le gouvernail, et qu'un troi- 
sieme jette le filet ou harponne le poisson, et la peche a un succes impossible 
sans ce concours." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. c.) 

1 "The doing of it (agricultural work) at the critical juncture is of so 
much the greater consequence." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the 
Present Price," &amp;c, p. 9.) "In agriculture, there is no more important factor 
than that of time." (Liebig: "Ueber Theorie und Praxis in der Landwirt- 
schaft." 1856, p. 23.) 

2 "The next evil is one which one would scarcely expect to find in a 
country which exports more labour than any other in the world, with the 
exception, perhaps, of China and England-^the impossibility of procuring 
a sufficient number of hands to clean the cotton. The consequence of this 
is that large quantities of the crop are left unpicked, while another portion is 
gathered from the ground when it has fallen, and is of course discoloured and 
partially rotted, so that for want of labour at the proper season the culti- 
vator is actually forced to submit to the loss of a large part of that crop for 
which England is so anxiously looking." ("Bengal Hurkaru." Bi-Monthly 
Overland Summary of News, 22nd July, 1861.) 



CO-OPERATION 329 



tion of arena simultaneous with, and arising from, extension of 
scale, whereby a number of useless expenses are cut down, is owing 
to the conglomeration of labourers, to the aggregation of various 
processes, and to the concentration of the means of production. l 

The" combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal 
sum of isolated working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, 
and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the 
production of a given useful effect. Whether the combined work- 
ing-day, in a given case, acquires this increased productive power, 
because it heightens the mechanical force of labour, or extends its 
sphere of action over a greater space, or contracts the field of produc- 
tion relatively to the scale of production, or at the critical moment 
sets large masses of labour to work, or excites emulation between 
individuals and raises their animal spirits, or impresses on the sim- 
ilar operations carried on by a number of men the stamp of con- 
tinuity and many-sidedness, or performs simultaneously different 
operations, or economises the means of production by use in com- 
mon, or lends to individual labour the character of average social 
labour— whichever of these be the cause of the increase, the spe- 
cial productive power of the combined working-day is, under all 
circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the produc- 
tive power of social labour. This power is due to co-operation it- 
self. When the labourer co-operates systematically with others, he 
strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops the ca- 
pabilities of his species. 2 

As general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being 
brought together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary 
condition of their co-operation. Hence wage-labourers cannot co- 
operate, unless they are employed simultaneously by the same cap- 
ital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their labour-powers 
are bought simultaneously by him. The total value of these la- 



1 In the progress of culture "all, and perhaps more than all, the capital 
and labour which once loosely occupied 500 acres, are now concentrated 
for the more complete tillage of 100." Although "relatively to the amount of 
capital and labour employed, space is concentrated, it is an enlarged sphere 
of production, as compared to the sphere of production formerly occupied 
or worked upon by one single independent agent of production." (R. Jones: 
"An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth," part I. On Rente London, 1831, 

P- 191 -) 

2 "La lorza di ciascuno uomo e minima, ma la riunione delle minime 
forze forma una forza totale maggiore anche della somma delle forze mede- 
si me fino a che le forze per essere ri unite possono diminuere il tempo ed accres- 
cere lo spazio della loro azione." (G. R. Garli, Note to P. Verri, 1. c, t. xv., 
p. 196.) 



330 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



bour-powers, or the amount of the wages of these labourers for a day, 
or a week, as the case may be, must be ready in the pocket of 
the capitalist, before the workmen are assembled for the proc- 
ess of production. The payment of 300 workmen at once, though 
only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than does 
the payment of a smaller number of men, week by week, during a 
whole year. Hence the number of the labourers that co-operate, or 
the scale of co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the 
amount of capital that the individual capitalist can spare for 
the purchase of labour-power; in other words, on the extent to 
which a single capitalist has command over the means of subsist- 
ence of a number of labourers. 

And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. 
For example, the outlay on raw material is 30 times as great, for 
the capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of the 30 cap- 
italists who employ 10 men. The value and quantity of the in- 
struments of labour used in common do not, it is true, increase 
at the same rate as the number of workmen, but they do increase 
very considerably. Hence, concentration of large masses of 
the means of production in the hands of individual capitalists, 
is a material condition for the co-operation of wage-labour- 
ers, and the extent of the co-operation or the scale of production, 
depends on the extent of this concentration. 

We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount 
of capital was necessary, in order that the number of labourers 
simultaneously employed, and, consequently, the amount of 
surplus-value produced, might suffice to liberate the employer 
himself from manual labour, to convert him from a small master 
into a capitalist, and thus formally to establish capitalist produc- 
tion. We now see that a certain minimum amount is a necessary 
condition for the conversion of numerous isolated and independent 
processes into one combined social process. 

We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital 
was only a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead of 
working for himself, works for and consequently under the capital- 
ist. By the co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of 
capital develops into a requisite for carrying on the labour-proc- 
ess itself, into a real requisite of production. That a capitalist 
should command on the field of production, is now as indispensa- 
ble as that a general should command on the field of battle. 

All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a 
directing authority, in order to secure the harmonious working of 
the individual activities, and to perform the general functions 



CO-OPERATION 331 



that have their origin in the action of the combined organism, as 
distinguished from the action of its separate organs. A single vio- 
lin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a sep- 
arate one. The work of directing, superintending, and adjusting, 
becomes one of the functions of capital, from the moment that the 
labour under the control of capital, becomes co-operative. Once a 
function of capital, it acquires special characteristics. 

The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist produc- 
tion, is to extract the greatest possible amount of surplus-value, 1 
and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible 
extent. As the number of the co-operating labourers increases, so 
too does their resistance to the domination of capital, and with it, 
the necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counter- 
pressure. The control exercised by the capitalist is not only a spe- 
cial function, due to the nature of the social labour-process, and 
peculiar to that process, but it is, at the same time, a function of 
the exploitation of a social labour-process, and is consequently 
rooted in the unavoidable antagonism between the exploiter and 
the living and labouring raw material he exploits. 

Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of 
production, now no longer the property of the labourer, but of 
the capitalist, the necessity increases for some effective control 
over the proper application of those means. 2 Moreover, the co-op- 
eration of wage-labourers is entirely brought about by the capital 
that employs them. Their union into one single productive body 
and the establishment of a connexion between their individual 
functions, are matters foreign and external to them, are not their 
own act, but the act of the capital that brings and keeps them to- 
gether. Hence the connexion existing between their various labours 
appears to them, ideally, in the shape of a preconceived plan 
of the capitalist, and practically in the shape of the authority of 
the same capitalist, in the shape of the powerful will of another, 
who subjects their activity to his aims. If, then, the control of the 



1 "Profits ... is the sole end of trade." (J. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. 11.) 

2 That Philistine paper, the Spectator, states that after the introduc- 
tion of a sort of partnership between capitalist and workmen in the "Wire- 
work Company of Manchester," "the first result was a sudden decrease in 
waste, the men not seeing why they should waste their own property any more 
than any other master's, and waste is, perhaps, next to bad debts, the greatest 
source of manufacturing loss." The same paper finds that the main defect in 
the Rochdale co-operative experiments is this: "They showed that associa- 
tions of workmen could manage shops, mills, and almost all forms of indus- 
try with success, and they immediately improved the condition of the men 
but then they did not leave a clear place for masters." Quelle horreur! 



332 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

capitalist is in substance two-fold by reason of the two-fold nature 
of the process of production itself,— which, on the one hand, is a 
social process for producing use-values, on the other, a process 
for creating surplus-value — in form that control is despotic. As 
co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar 
to itself. Just as at first the capitalist is relieved from actual la- 
bour so soon as his capital has reached that minimum amount 
with which capitalist production, as such, begins, so now, he hands 
over the work of direct and constant supervision of the individual 
workmen, and groups of workmen, to a special kind of wage-la- 
bourer. An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a 
capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers), and ser- 
geants (foremen, overlookers), who, while the work is being done, 
command in the name of the capitalist. The work of supervision 
becomes their established and exclusive function. When com- 
paring the mode of production of isolated peasants and artisans 
with production by slave-labour, the political economist counts 
this labour of superintendence among the faux frais of production. * 
But, when considering the capitalist mode of production, he, on 
the contrary, treats the work of control made necessary by the co- 
operative character of the labour-process as identical with the dif- 
ferent work of control, necessitated by the capitalist character of 
that process and the antagonism of interests between capitalist 
and labourer. 2 It is not because he is a leader of industry that a 
man is a capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry be- 
cause he is a capitalist. The leadership of industry is an attribute 
of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and 
judge, were attributes of landed property. 3 

The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done 
bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can sell no more 
than what he has — i.e., his individual, isolated labour-power. 



1 Professor Cairnes, after stating that the superintendence of labour is 
a leading feature of production by slaves in the Southern States of North 
America, continues: "The peasant proprietor (of the North), appropriating 
the whole produce of his toil, needs no other stimulus to exertion. Superin- 
tendence is here completely dispensed with." (Cairnes, 1. c, pp. 48, 49.) 

2 Sir James Steuart, a writer altogether remarkable for his quick eye 
lor the characteristic social distinctions between different modes of produc- 
tion, says: "Why do large undertakings in the manufacturing way ruin 
private industry, but by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves?" ("Prin. 
of Pol. Econ.," London, 1767, v. I., pp. 167, 168.) 

3 Auguste Comte and his school might therefore, have shown that feu- 
dal lords are an eternal necessity in the same way that they have done in 
the case of the lords of capital. 



CO-OPERATION 333 



This state of things is in no way altered by the fact that the capi- 
talist, instead of buying the labour-power of one man, buys that of 
100, and enters into separate contracts with 100 unconnected men 
instead of with one. He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, 
without letting them co-operate. He pays them the value of 100 
independent labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined 
labour-power of the hundred. Being independent of each other, 
the labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with the 
capitalist, but not with one another. This co-operation begins only 
with the labour-process, but they have then ceased to belong to 
themselves. On entering that process, they become incorporated 
with capital. As co-operators, as members of a working organism, 
they are but special modes of existence of capital. Hence, the pro- 
ductive power developed by the labourer when working in co-oper- 
ation, is the productive power of capital. This power is developed 
gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given con- 
ditions, and it is capital that places them under such conditions. 
Because this power costs capital nothing, and because, on the oth- 
er hand, the labourer himself does not develop it before his la- 
bour belongs to capital, it appears as a power with which capital is 
endowed by Nature— a productive power that is immanent in 
capital. 

The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in 
the gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, Etrus- 
cans, &amp;c. "It has happened in times past that these Oriental States, 
after supplying the expenses of their civil and military establish- 
ments, have found themselves in possession of a surplus which they 
could apply to works of magnificence or utility and in the con- 
struction of these their command over the hands and arms of almost 
the entire non-agricultural population has produced stupendous 
monuments which still indicate their power. The teeming valley 
of the Nile... produced food for a swarming non-agricultural popu- 
lation, and this food, belonging to the monarch and the priesthood, 
afforded the means of erecting the mighty monuments which 
filled the land.... In moving the colossal statues and vast masses 
of which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost alone, 
was prodigally used.... The number of the labourers and the con- 
centration of their efforts sufficed. We see mighty coral reefs rising 
from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet each 
individual depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible. The non- 
agricultural labourers of an Asiatic monarchy have little but then- 
individual bodily exertions to bring to the task, but their number 
is their strength, and the power of directing these masses gave rise 



334 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

to the palaces and temples, the pyramids, and the armies of gi- 
gantic statues of which the remains astonish and perplex us. It 
is that confinement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a 
few hands, which makes such undertakings possible." ' This power 
of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &amp;c, has in 
modern society been transferred to the capitalist, whether he be an 
isolated, or as in joint-stock companies, a collective capitalist. 

Co-operation, such as we find it at the dawn of human devel- 
opment, among races who live by the chase, 2 or, say, in the agri- 
culture of Indian communities, is based, on the one hand, on own- 
ership in common of the means of production, and on the other 
hand, on the fact, that in those cases, each individual has no more 
torn himself off from the navel-string of his tribe or community, 
than each bee has freed itself from connexion with the hive. Such 
co-operation is distinguished from capitalistic co-operation by 
both of the above characteristics. The sporadic application of co- 
operation on a large scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and 
in modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and servi- 
tude, principally on slavery. The capitalistic form, on the con- 
trary, pre-supposes from first to last, the free wage-labourer, who 
sells his labour power to capital. Historically, however, this form 
is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carry- 
ing on of independent handicrafts whether in guilds or not. 3 From 
the standpoint of these, capitalistic co-operation does not man- 
ifest itself as a particular historical form of co-operation, but co- 
operation itself appears to be a historical form peculiar to, and spe- 
cifically distinguishing, the capitalist process of production. 

Just as the social productive power of labour that is developed 
by co-operation, appears to be the productive power of capital, 
so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of production 
carried on by isolated independent labourers, or even by small em- 



1 R. Jones. "Textbook of Lectures," &amp;c, pp. 77, 78. The ancient Assyr- 
ian, Egyptian, and other collections in London, and in other European capi- 
tals, make us eye-witnesses of the modes of carrying on that co-operative 
labour. 

2 Linguet is probably right, when in his "Theorie des Lois Civiles," 
he declares hunting to be the first form of co-operation, and man-hunting 
(war) one of the earliest forms of hunting. 

8 Peasant agriculture on a small scale, and the carrying on of independ- 
ent handicrafts, which together form the basis of the feudal mode of produc- 
tion, and after the dissolution of that system, continue side by side with 
the capitalist mode, also form the economic foundation k of the classical com- 
munities at their best, after the primitive form of ownership of land in com- 
mon had disappeared, and before slavery had seized on production in earnest. 



CO-OPERATION 



335 



ployers, appears to be a specific form of the capitalist process of 
production. It is the first change experienced by the actual labour- 
process, when subjected to capital. This change takes place spon- 
taneously. The simultaneous employment of a large number of 
wage-labourers, in one and the same process, which is a necessary 
condition of this change, also forms the starting-point of capital- 
ist production. This point coincides with the birth of capital 
itself. If then, on the one hand, the capitalist mode of production 
presents itself to us historically, as a necessary condition to the 
transformation of the labour-process into a social process, so, on 
the other hand, this social form of the labour-process presents it- 
self, as a method employed by capital for the more profitable ex- 
ploitation of labour, by increasing that labour's productiveness. 

In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed 
it, co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all production on a 
large scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form charac- 
teristic of a particular epoch in the development of the capitalist 
mode of production. At the most it appears to do so, and that only 
approximately, in the handicraft-like beginnings of manufacture, l 
and in that kind of agriculture on a large scale, which corresponds 
to the epoch of manufacture, and is distinguished from peasant 
agriculture, mainly by the number of the labourers simultaneously 
employed, and by the mass of the means of production concentrated 
for their use. Simple co-operation is always the prevailing form, in 
those branches of production in which capital operates on a large 
scale, and division of labour and machinery play but a subordi- 
nate part. 

Go-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the 
capitalist mode of production; nevertheless the elementary form 
of co-operation continues to subsist as a particular form of capi- 
talist production side by side with the more developed forms of 
that mode of production. 



1 "Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together 
on the same work be not the way to advance it? And whether it had been oth- 
erwise possible for England, to have carried on her Woollen Manufacture to so 
great a perfection?" (Berkeley. "The Querist." London, 1751, p. 56, par. 521.) 



336 



CHAPTER XIV 
DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 

SECTION 1.— TWO-FOLD ORIGIN OF MANUFACTURE 

That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes 
its typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent character- 
istic form of the capitalist process of production throughout the 
manufacturing period properly so called. That period, roughly 
speaking, extends from the middle of the 16th to the last third 
of the 18th century. 

Manufacture takes its rise in two ways: — 

(1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control of 
a single capitalist, of labourers belonging to various independent 
handicrafts, but through whose hands a given article must pass on 
its way to completion. A carriage, for example, was formerly the 
product of the labour of a great number of independent artificers, 
such as wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, up- 
holsterers, turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, 
gilders, &amp;c. In the manufacture of carriages, however, all these 
different artificers are assembled in one building where they work 
into one another's hands. It is true that a carriage cannot be gilt 
before it has been made. But if a number of carriages are being made 
simultaneously, some may be in the hands of the gilders while 
othtTS are going through an earlier process. So far, we are still 
in the domain of simple co-operalion, which finds its materials 
ready to hand in the shape of men and things. But very soon an im- 
portant change takes place. The tailor, the locksmith, and the oth- 
er artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, 
each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to 
carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. But, on the other 
hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form 
best adapted to the narrowed sphere of action. At first, carriage 
manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts. 



DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 337 

By degrees, it becomes the splitting up of carriage-making int© its 
various detail processes, each of which crystallises into the ex- 
clusive function of a particular workman, the manufacture, as a 
whole, being carried on by the men in conjunction. In the same 
way, cloth manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufac- 
tures, arose by combining different handicrafts together under the 
control of a single capitalist. l 

(2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of 
this— namely, by one capitalist employing simultaneously in 
one workshop a number of artificers, who all do the same, or the 
same kind of work, such as making paper, type, or needles. This 
is co-operation in its most elementary form. Each of these artific- 
ers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two apprentices), makes the 
entire commodity, and he consequently performs in succession 
all the operations necessary for its production. He still works in 
his old handicraft-like way. But very soon external circumstances 
cause a different use to be made of the concentration of the work- 
men on one spot, and of the simultaneousness of their work. An in- 
creased quantity of the article has perhaps to be delivered within 
a given time. The work is therefore re-distributed. Instead of each 
man being allowed to perform all the various operations in suc- 
cession, these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated 
ones, carried on side by side; each is assigned to a different arti- 
ficer, and the whole of them together are performed simultaneous- 
ly by the co-operating workmen. This accidental repartition gets 
repeated, develops advantages of its own, and gradually ossifies 
into a systematic division of labour. The commodity, from being 
the individual product of an independent artificer, becomes the so- 
cial product of a union of artificers, each of whom performs one, 



1 To give a more modern instance: The silk spinning and weaving of 
Lyons and Nimes "est toute patriarcale; elle emploie beaucoup de femmes et 
d'enfants, mais sans les epuiser ni les corrompre; elle les laisse dans leur 
belles vallees de la Drome, du Var, de I'lsere, de Vaucluse, pour y elever 
des vers et devider leurscocons; jamais elle n'entre dans une veritable fabri- 
que Pour el re aussi bien observe ... leprincipe de la division du travail s'y 
revet d'un caractere special II y a bien des devideuses, des moulineurs. des 
teinturiers, des encolleurs, puis des tisserands; mais its ne sont pas reunis 
dans un ineine etablissement, ne dependent pas d'un meme maitre; tons ils 
sont independants " (A. Blanqui: "Cours d'Econ Industrielle" Recueilli 
par A Blaise Paris, 1838-39, p 79.) Since Blanqui wrote this, the vari- 
ous independent labourers have, to some extent, been united in factories. 
[And since Marx wrote the above, the power-loom has invaded these facto- 
ries, and is now— 1886— rapidly superseding the hand-loom. {Added in 
the 4th German edition.— The Krefeld silk industry also has its tale to 
tell anent this subject.)—/* 1 . E.\ 



338 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

and only one, of the constituent partial operations. The same oper- 
ations which, in the case of a papermaker belonging to a German 
Guild, merged one into the other as the successive acts of one arti- 
ficer, became in the Dutch paper manufacture so many partial oper- 
ations carried on side by side by numerous co-operating labour- 
ers. The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the corner- 
stone on which the English needle manufacture was raised. 
But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed a series 
of perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was 
not long before there were 20 needlemakers side by side, each 
performing one alone of those 20 operations, and in consequence 
of further experience, each of those 20 operations was again 
split up, isolated, and made the exclusive function of a separate 
workman. 

The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of hand- 
icrafts, is therefore two-fold. On the one hand, it arises from the 
union of various independent handicrafts, which become stripped 
of their independence and specialised to such an extent as to be re- 
duced to mere supplementary partial processes in the production 
of one particular commodity. On the other hand, it arises from the 
co-operation of artificers of one handicraft; it splits up that partic- 
ular handicraft into its various detail operations, isolating, and 
making these operations independent of one another up to the point 
where each becomes the exclusive function of a particular la- 
bourer. On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces 
division of labour into a process of production, or further devel- 
ops that division; on the other hand, it unites together handicrafts 
that were formerly separate. But whatever may have been its 
particular starting-point, its final form is invariably the same — 
a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings. 

For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manu- 
facture, it is essential that the following points be firmly 
grasped. First, the decomposition of a process of production into its 
various successive steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolu- 
tion of a handicraft into its successive manual operations. Whether 
complex or simple, each operation has to be done by hand, retains 
the character of a handicraft, and is therefore dependent on the 
strength, skill, quickness, and sureness, of the individual work- 
man in handling his tools. The handicraft continues to be the 
basis. This narrow technical basis excludes a really scientific 
analysis of any definite process of industrial production, since it is 
still a condition that each detail process gone through by the prod- 
uct must be capable of being done by hand and of forming, in its 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 339 

way, a separate handicraft. It is just because handicraft skill con- 
tinues, in this way, to be the foundation of the process of produc- 
tion, that each workman becomes exclusively assigned to a partial 
function, and that for the rest of his life, his labour-power is 
turned into the organ of this detail function. 

Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co- 
operation, and many of its disadvantages spring from the general 
character of co-operation, and not from this particular form of it. 

SECTION 2.— THE DETAIL LABOURER AND HIS IMPLEMENTS 

If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear 
that a labourer who all his life performs one and the same simple 
operation, converts his whole body into the automatic, special- 
ised implement of that operation. Consequently, he takes less 
time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a whole series of 
operations in succession. But the collective labourer, who consti- 
tutes the living mechanism of manufacture, is made up solely of 
such specialised detail labourers. Hence, in comparison with the 
independent handicraft, more is produced in a given time, or the 
productive power of labour is increased. 1 Moreover, when once 
this fractional work is established as the exclusive function of one 
person, the methods it employs become perfected. The workman's 
continued repetition of the same simple act, and the concentra- 
tion of his attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain 
the desired effect with the minimum of exertion. But since there 
are always several generations of labourers living at one time, 
and working together at the manufacture of a given article, the 
technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus acquired, become es- 
tablished, and are accumulated and handed down. 2 Manufacture, 
in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, by reproducing, 
and systematically driving to an extreme within the workshop, 
the naturally developed differentiation of trades, which it found 
ready to hand in society at large. On the other hand, the conver- 
sion of fractional work into the life-calling of one man, corresponds 
to the tendency shown by earlier societies, to make trades heredi- 
tary; either to petrify them into castes, or whenever definite his- 
torical conditions beget in the individual a tendency to vary in a 

1 "The more any manufacture of much variety shall be distributed and 
assigned to different artists, the same must needs be better done and with 
greater expedition, with less loss of time and labour." ("The Advantages of 
the East India Trade," Lond , 1720, p. 71.) 

2 "Easy labour is transmitted skill." (Th. Ilodgskin, "Popular Politi- 
cal Economy," p. 48.) 



340 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



manner incompatible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into 
guilds. Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural 
law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into 
species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree of devel- 
opment has been reached, the heredity of castes and the exclu- 
siveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society. * "The muslins of 
Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods of Coroman- 
del in brilliant and durable colours, have never been surpassed. 
Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division of la- 
bour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the manu- 
facturing interest of Europe. The weaver is merely a detached in- 
dividual, working a web when ordered of a customer, and with a 
loom of the rudest construction, consisting sometimes of a few 
branches or bars of wood, put roughly together. There is even no 
expedient for rolling up the warp; the loom must therefore be kept 
stretched to its full length, and becomes so inconveniently large, 
that it cannot be contained within the hut of the manufacturer, 
who is therefore compelled to ply his trade in the open air, where it 
is interrupted by every vicissitude of the weather." 2 It is only the 
special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and 
transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does 
to the spider, this proficiency. And yet the work of such a Hindu 
weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufactur- 
ing labourer. 

An artificer, who performs one after another the various frac- 
tional operations in the production of a finished article, must at 
one time change his place, at another his tools. The transition from 
one operation to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and cre- 
ates, so to say, gaps in his working-day .These gaps close up so soon as 



1 "The arts also have ... in Egypt reached the requisite degree of per- 
fection. For it is the only country where artificers may not in any way med- 
dle with the affairs of another class of citizens, but must follow that calling 
alone which by law is hereditary in their clan.... In other countries it is 
found that tradesmen divide their attention between too many objects. 
At one time they try agriculture, at another they take to commerce, at an- 
other they busy themselves with two or three occupations at once. In free coun- 
tries, they mostly frequent the assemblies of the people.... In Egypt, on the 
contrary, every artificer is severely punished if he meddles with affairs of 
State, or carries on several trades at once. Thus there is nothing to disturb 
their application to their calling.... Moreover, since, they inherit from their 
forefathers numerous rules, they are eager to discover fresh advantages." 
(Diodorus Siculus: Bibl. Hist. I, 1. c, 74.) 

2 "Historical and descriptive account of Brit India, v &amp;c ," by Hugh Mur- 
ray and James Wilson, &amp;c, Edinburgh 1832. v. II., p. 449. The Indian 
loom is upright, i.e., the warp is stretched vertically. 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 341 

he is tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish 
in proportion as the changes in his work diminish. The resulting 
increased productive power is owing either to an increased expend- 
iture of labour-power in a given time— i.e., to increased inten- 
sity of labour — or to a decrease in the amount of labour-power 
unproductively consumed. The extra expenditure of power, demand- 
ed by every transition from rest to motion, is made up for by pro- 
longing the duration of the normal velocity when once acquired. On 
the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the 
intensity and flow of a man's animal spirits, which find recreation 
and delight in mere change of activity. 

The productiveness of labour depends not only on the profi- 
ciency of the workman, but on the perfection of his tools. Tools of 
the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, hammers, &amp;c, may 
be employed in different processes; and the same tool may serve va- 
rious purposes in a single process. But so soon as the different oper- 
ations of a labour-process are disconnected the one from the other, 
and each fractional operation acquires in the hands of the detail 
labourer a suitable and peculiar form, alterations become neces- 
sary in the implements that previously served more than one pur- 
pose. The direction taken by this change is determined by the dif- 
ficulties experienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the 
implement. Manufacture is characterised by the differentiation of 
the instruments of labour— a differentiation whereby implements 
of a given sort acquire fixed shapes, adapted to each particular ap- 
plication, and by the specialisation of those instruments, giving 
to each special implement its full play only in the hands of a spe- 
cific detail labourer. In Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers 
are produced, and not only is each adapted to one particular proc- 
ess, but several varieties often serve exclusively for the different 
operations in one and the same process. The manufacturing period 
simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by 
adapting them to the exclusively special functions of each detail 
labourer. 1 It thus creates at the same time one of the material 



1 Darwin in his epoch-making work on the origin of species, remarks, 
with reference to the natural organs of plants and animals, "So long as one 
and the same organ has different kinds of work to perform, a ground lor its 
changeability may possibly be found in this, that natural selection preserves 
or suppresses each small variation of form less carefully than if that organ 
were destined for one special purpose alone. Thus, knives that are adapted to 
cut all sorts of things, may, on the whole, be of one shape; but an implement 
destined to be used exclusively in oneway must have a different shape tor 
every different use." 



342 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a 
combination of simple instruments. 

The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest ele- 
ments of manufacture. Let us now turn to its aspect as a whole. 

SECTION 3.— THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL FORMS OF 

MANUFACTURE: HETEROGENEOUS MANUFACTURE, 

SERIAL MANUFACTURE 

The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental forms 
which, in spite of occasional blending, are essentially different 
in kind, and, moreover, play very distinct parts in the subsequent 
transformation of manufacture into modern industry carried on by 
machinery. This double character arises from the nature of the ar- 
ticle produced. This article either results from the mere mechani- 
cal fitting together of partial products made independently, or 
owes its completed shape to a series of connected processes and 
manipulations. 

A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5,000 inde- 
pendent parts. It cannot, however, serve as an example of the first 
kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by 
modern mechanical industry. But a watch can; and William Petty 
used it to illustrate the division of labour in manufacture. For- 
merly the individual work of a Nuremberg artificer, the watch has 
been transformed into the social product of an immense number 
of detail labourers, such as mainspring makers, dial makers, spi- 
ral spring makers, jewelled hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand 
makers, case makers, screw makers, gilders, with numerous sub- 
divisions, such as wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin mak- 
ers, movement makers, acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on 
the axles, polishes the facets, &amp;c), pivot makers, planteur de fmis- 
sage (puts the wheels and springs in the works), finisseur de baril- 
let (cuts teeth in the wheels, makes the holes of the right size, 
&amp;c), escapement makers, cylinder makers for cylinder escape- 
ments, escapement wheel makers, balance wheel makers, raquette 
makers (apparatus for regulating the watch), the planteur d'ech- 
appement (escapement maker proper); then the repasseur de ba- 
rillet (finishes the box for the spring, &amp;c), steel polishers, wheel 
polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, dial enamellers (melt 
the enamel on the copper), fabricant de pendants (makes the ring 
by which the case is hung), finisseur de charniere (puts the brass 
hinge in the cover, &amp;c), faiseur de secret (puts in the springs that 
open the case), graveur, ciseleur, polisseur de boite, &amp;c, &amp;c, and 
last of all the repasseur, who fits together the whole watch and 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 343 

hands it over in a going state. Only a few parts of the watch pass 
through several hands; and all these membra disjecta come togeth- 
er for the first time in the hand that binds them into one mechan- 
ical whole. This external relation between the finished product, 
and its various and diverse elements makes it, as well in this case 
as in the case of all similar finished articles, a matter of chance 
whether the detail labourers are brought together in one workshop 
or not. The detail operations may further be carried on like so many 
independent handicrafts, as they are in the Cantons of Vaud and 
Neufchatel; while in Geneva there exist large watch manufactories 
where the detail labourers directly co-operate under the control 
of a single capitalist. And even in the latter case the dial, the 
springs, and the case, are seldom made in the factory itself. To 
carry on the trade as a manufacture, with concentration of work- 
men, is, in the watch trade, profitable only under exceptional con- 
ditions, because competition is greater between the labourers who 
desire to work at home, and because the splitting up of the work 
into a number of heterogeneous processes, permits but little use of 
the instruments of labour in common, and the capitalist, by scat- 
tering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &amp;c. x Nevertheless 
the position of this detail labourer who, though he works at home, 
does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, etablisseur), is very differ- 
ent from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own 
customers. 3 

The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, pro- 
duces articles that go through connected phases of development, 



1 In the year 1854 Geneva produced 80,000 watches, which is not one- 
fifth of the production in the Canton of Neufchatel. La Chaux-de-Fond alone, 
which we may look upon as a huge watch manufactory, produces yearly 
twice as many as Geneva. From 1850-61 Geneva produced 720,000 watches. 
See "Report from Geneva on the Watch Trade" in "Reports by H. M.'s Secre- 
taries of Embassy and Legation on the Manufactures, Commerce, &amp;c, No. 6, 
1863." The want of connexion alone, between the processes into which the pro- 
duction of articles that merely consist of parts fitted together is split up, 
makes it very difficult to convert such a manufacture into a branch of modern 
industry carried on by machinery; but in the case of a watch there are two 
other impediments in addition, the minuteness and delicacy of its parts, 
and its character as an article of luxury. Hence their variety, which is such, 
that in the best London houses scarcely a dozen watches are made alike in the 
course of a year. The watch manufactory of Messrs. Vacheron &amp; Constan- 
ts, in which machinery has been employed with success, produces at the 
most three or four different varieties of size and form 

2 In watchmaking, that classical example of heterogeneous manufac- 
ture, we may study with great accuracy the above-mentioned differentiation 
and specialisation of the instruments of labour caused by the sub-division 
of handicrafts. 



344 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



through a series of processes step by step, like the wire in the manu- 
facture of needles, which passes through the hands of 72 and 
sometimes even 92 different detail workmen. 

In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines 
scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the various 
phases of production are separated from each other. The time tak- 
en in passing from one stage to another is shortened, so is the la- 
bour that effectuates this passage. 1 In comparison with a handi- 
craft, productive power is gained, and this gain is owing to the 
general co-operative character of manufacture. On the other hand, 
division of labour, which is the distinguishing principle of manu- 
facture, requires the isolation of the various stages of production 
and their independence of each other. The establishment and 
maintenance of a connexion between the isolated functions neces- 
sitates the incessant transport of the article from one hand to 
another, and from one process to another. From the standpoint of 
modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a 
characteristic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent 
in the principle of manufacture. 2 

If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw mate- 
rials, of rags, for instance, in paper manufacture, or of wire in nee- 
dle manufacture, we perceive that it passes in succession through 
a series of stages in the hands of the various detail workmen 
until completion. On the other hand, if we look at the workshop 
as a whole, we see the raw material in all the stages of its produc- 
tion at the same time. The collective labourer, with one set of 
his many hands armed with one kind of tools, draws the wire, 
with another set, armed with different tools, he at the same time, 
straightens it, with another, he cuts it, with another, points it, 
and so on. The different detail processes, which were successive 
in time, have become simultaneous, go on side by side in space. 
Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished commodities 
in a given time. 3 This simultaneity, it is true, is due to the general 



1 "In so close a cohabitation of the people, the carriage must needs be 
less." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade," p. 106.) 

2 "The isolation of the different stages of manufacture, consequent upon 
the employment oi manual labour, adds immensely to the cost of production, 
the loss mainly arising from the mere removals from one process to another." 
("The Industry of Nations." Lond., 1855. Part II, p. 200.) 

* "It (the division of labour) produces also an economy ot time by 
separating the work into its different branches, all of which may be carried 
on into execution at the same moment .... By carrying on all the different 
processes at once, whioh an individual must have executed separately, 
it becomes possible to produce a multitude of pins completely finished in the 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 345 

co-operative form of the process as a whole; but Manufacture not 
only finds the conditions for co-operation ready to hand, it also, 
to some extent, creates them by the sub-division of handicraft 
labour. On the other hand, it accomplishes this social organisation 
of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a single 
fractional detail. 

Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the 
same time, only a particular stage in the development of one and 
the same finished article, each labourer, or each group of labourers, 
prepares the raw material for another labourer or group. The re- 
sult of the labour of the one is the starting-point for the labour of 
the other. The one workman therefore gives occupation directly 
to the other. The labour-time necessary in each partial process, for 
attaining the desired effect, is learnt by experience, and the mech- 
anism of Manufacture, as a whole, is based on the assumption 
that a given result will be obtained in a given time. It is only on 
this assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes 
can proceed uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side. 
It is clear that this direct dependence of the operations, and there- 
fore of the labourers, on each other, compels each one of them to 
spend on his work no more than the necessary time, and thus a 
continuity, uniformity, regularity, order, 1 and even intensity of 
labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten than is to be found in 
an independent handicraft or even in simple co-operation. The 
rule, that the labour-time expended on a commodity should not 
exceed that which is socially necessary for its production, appears, 
in the production of commodities generally, to be established by 
the mere effect of competition; since, to express ourselves superfi- 
cially, each single producer is obliged to sell his commodity at 
its market-price. In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out 
of a given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of 
the process of production itself. 2 

Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield 
therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional products. 



same Lime as a single pin might have been either cut or pointed." (Dugald 
Stewart, 1. c, p. 319.) 

1 "The more variety ot artists to every manufacture .. the greater the 
order and regularity of every work, the same must needs be done in less time, 
the labour must be less." ("The Advantages," &amp;c, p. 68.) 

2 Nevertheless, the manufacturing system, in many branches oi indus- 
try, attains this result but very imperfectly, because it knows not how to 
control with certainty the general chemical and physical conditions ol the 
process of production. 



346 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to perform the 
same operation, there must be a different number of labourers for 
each operation; for instance, in type manufacture, there are four 
founders and two breakers to one rubber: the founder casts 2,000 
type an hour, the breaker breaks up 4,000, and the rubber polishes 
8,000. Here we have again the principle of co-operation in its sim- 
plest form, the simultaneous employment of many doing the same 
thing; only now, this principle is the expression of an organic 
relation. The division of labour, as carried out in Manufacture, 
not only simplifies and multiplies the qualitatively different parts 
of the social collective labourer, but also creates a fixed mathemati- 
cal relation or ratio which regulates the quantitative extent of those 
parts — i.e., the relative number of labourers, or the relative size 
of the group of labourers, for each detail operation. It develops, 
along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour-proc- 
ess, a quantitative rule and proportionality for that process. 

When once the most fitting proportion has been experimental- 
ly established for the numbers of the detail labourers in the various 
groups when producing on a given scale, that scale can be extended 
only by employing a multiple of each particular group. * There is 
this to boot, that the same individual can do certain kinds of work 
just as well on a large as on a small scale; for instance, the labour 
of superintendence, the carriage of the fractional product from one 
stage to the next, &amp;c. The isolation of such functions, their allot- 
ment to a particular labourer, does not become advantageous till 
after an increase in the number of labourers employed; but this 
increase must affect every group proportionally. 

The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail 
function is assigned, is made up of homogeneous elements, and is 
one of the constituent parts of the total mechanism. In many manu- 
factures, however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, 
the total mechanism being a repetition or multiplication of these 
elementary organisms. Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass 
bottles. It may be resolved into three essentially different stages. 
First, the preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the 
components of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &amp;c, and melt- 



1 "When (from the peculiar nature of the produce of each manufactory), 
the number of processes into which it is most advantageous to divide it is 
ascertained, as well as the number of individuals to be employed, then all 
other manufactories which do not employ a direct multiple of this number 
will produce the article at a greater cost.... Hence arises one of the causes 
of the great size of manufacturing establishments." (C. Babbage. "On the 
Economy of Machinery," 1st ed. London, 1832. Ch. xxi., pp. 172-173.) 



DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 347 

ing them into a fluid mass of glass. 1 Various detail labourers are 
employed in this first stage, as also in the final one of removing 
the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, 
&amp;c. In the middle, between these two stages, comes the glass 
melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass. At each mouth 
of the furnace, there works a group, called "the hole," consisting 
of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one gatherer, one put- 
ter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. These five detail workers 
are so many special organs of a single working organism that acts 
only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by the direct co- 
operation of the whole five. The whole body is paralysed if but one 
of its members be wanting. But a glass furnace has several openings 
(in England from 4 to 6), each of which contains an earthenware 
melting-pot full of molten glass, and employs a similar five-mem- 
bered group of workers. The organisation of each group is based 
on division of labour, but the bond between the different groups is 
simple co-operation, which, by using in common one of the means 
of production, the furnace, causes it to be more economically con- 
sumed. Such a furnace, with its 4-6 groups, constitutes a glass 
house; and a glass manufactory comprises a number of such 
glass nouses, together with the apparatus and workmen requisite 
for the preparatory and final stages. 

Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combina- 
tion of various handicrafts, so, too, it develops into a combina- 
tion of various manufactures. The larger English glass manufac- 
turers, for instance, make their own earthenware melting-pots, be- 
cause, on the quality of these depends, to a great extent, the suc- 
cess or failure of the process. The manufacture of one of the means 
of production is here united with that of the product. On the other 
hand, the manufacture of the product may be united with oth- 
er manufactures, of which that product is the raw material, or 
with the products of which it is itself subsequently mixed. Thus, 
we find the manufacture of flint glass combined with that of glass 
cutting and brass founding; the latter for the metal settings of va- 
rious articles of glass. The various manufactures so combined form 
more or less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are 
at the same time independent processes, each with its own divi- 
sion of labour. In spite of the many advantages offered by this com- 
bination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete technical 



1 In England, the melting-furnace is distinct from the glass-turnace 
in which the glass is manipulated. In Belgium, one and the same furnace 
serves for both processes. 



348 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

system on its own foundation. That happens only on its trans- 
formation into an industry carried on by machinery. 

Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening 
the necessary labour-time in the production of commodities, 1 
was accepted and formulated: and the use of machines, especially 
for certain simple first processes that have to be conducted on a very 
large scale, and with the application of great force, sprang up here 
and there. Thus, at an early period in paper manufacture, the tear- 
ing up of the rags was done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the 
pounding of the ores was effected by stamping mills. 2 The Roman 
Empire had handed down the elementary form of all machinery in 
the water-wheel. 3 

The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions 
of the compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the auto- 
matic clock. But, on the whole, machinery played that subordi- 
nate part which Adam Smith assigns to it in comparison with 
division of labour. 4 The sporadic use of machinery in the 17th cen- 
tury was of the greatest importance, because it supplied the great 
mathematicians of that time with a practical basis and stimulant 
to the creation of the science of mechanics. 

The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a num- 
ber of detail labourers, is the machinery specially characteristic 
of the manufacturing period. The various operations that are per- 
formed in turns by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one 



1 This can be seen from W. Petty, John Bellers, Andrew Yarranton, 
"The Advantages of the East India Trade," and J. Vanderlint, not to mention 
others. 

2 Towards the end of the 16th century, mortars and sieves were still 
used in France for pounding and washing ores. 

8 The whole history of the development of machinery can be traced 
in the history of the corn mill. The factory in England is still a "mill." In 
German technological works of the first decade of this century, the term 
"muhle" is still found in use, not only for all machinery driven by the forces 
of Nature, but also for all manufactures where apparatus in the nature of 
machinery is applied. 

4 As will be seen more in detail in the fourth book of this work, Adam 
Smith has not established a single new proposition relating to division of 
labour. What, however, characterises him as the political economist par 
excellence of the period of Manufacture, is the stress he lays on division of 
labour. The subordinate part which he assigns to machinery gave occasion 
in the early days of modern mechanical industry to the polemic of Lauder- 
dale, and, at a later period, to that of Ure. A. Smith also confounds differ- 
entiation of the instruments of labour, in which the detail labourers them- 
selves took an active part, with the invention of machinery; in this latter, 
it is not the workmen in manufactories, but learned men, handicraftsmen, 
and even peasants (Brindley), who play a part. 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 349 

with another during the progress of production, lay claim to him 
in various ways. In one operation he must exert more strength, in 
another more skill, in another more attention; and the same indi- 
vidual does not possess all these qualities in an equal degree. Aft- 
er Manufacture has once separated, made independent, and isolat- 
ed the various operations, the labourers are divided, classified, and 
grouped according to their predominating qualities. If their natural 
endowments are, on the one hand, the foundation on which the di- 
vision of labour is built up, on the other hand, Manufacture, once 
introduced, develops in them new powers that are by nature fitted 
only for limited and special functions. The collective labourer now 
possesses, in an equal degree of excellence, all the qualities requi- 
site for production, and expends them in the most economical man- 
ner, by exclusively employing all his organs, consisting of particular 
labourers, or groups of labourers, in performing their special func- 
tions. * The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer 
become perfections when he is a part of the collective labourer. 2 
The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a never fail- 
ing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism 
compels him to work with the regularity of the parts of a ma- 
chine. 3 

Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and 
complex, both high and low, his members, the individual labour- 
powers, require different degrees of training, and must therefore 
have different values. Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy 
of labour-powers, to which there corresponds a scale of wages. 
If, on the one hand, the individual labourers are appropriated 
and annexed for life by a limited function; on the other hand, 
the various operations of the hierarchy are parcelled out among the 
labourers according to both their natural and their acquired capa- 

1 "The master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into 
different processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, 
can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is necessary for 
each process; whereas, if the whole work were executed by one workman, that 
person must possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and suffi- 
cient strength to execute the most laborious of the operations into which 
the article is divided." (Ch. Babbage, 1. c, ch. xix.) 

2 For instance, abnormal development of some muscles, curvature of 
bones, &amp;c. . . 

3 The question put by one of the Inquiry Commissioners, How the 
young persons are kept steadily to their work, is very correctly answered by 
Mr. Wm. Marshall, the general manager of a glass manufactory: "They cannot 
well neglect their work; when they once begin, they must go on; they are 
just the same as parts of a machine." ("Children's Empl. Comm.," 4tb Rep., 
1865, p. 247.) 



350 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



bilities. * Every process of production, however, requires certain 
simple manipulations, which every man is capable of doing. They 
too are now severed from their connexion with the more pregnant 
moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive functions of spe- 
cially appointed labourers. Hence, Manufacture begets, in every 
handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled la- 
bourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded. If it 
develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of 
the whole of a man's working capacity, it also begins to make a 
speciality of the absence of all development. Alongside of the hie- 
rarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labour- 
ers into skilled and unskilled. For the latter, the cost of appren- 
ticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that 
of artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified. In 
both cases the value of labour-power falls. 2 An exception to this 
law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process 
begets new and comprehensive functions, that either had no place 
at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts. The fall in the val- 
ue of labour-power, caused by the disappearance or diminution 
of the expenses of apprenticeship, implies a direct increase of sur- 
plus-value for the benefit of capital; for everything that shortens 
the necessary labour-time required for the reproduction of labour- 
power, extends the domain of surplus-labour. 

SECTION 4.— DIVISION OF LABOUR IN MANUFACTURE, 
AND DIVISION OF LABOUR IN SOCIETY 

We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its sim- 
ple elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, and 
finally, the totality of the mechanism. We shall now lightly touch 
upon the relation between the division of labour in manufacture, 



1 Dr. Ure, in his apotheosis of Modern Mechanical Industry, brings 
out the peculiar character of manufacture more sharply than previous econ- 
omists, who had not his polemical interest in the matter, and more sharply 
even than his contemporaries — Babbage, e.g., who, though much his 
superior as a mathematician and mechanician, treated mechanical industry 
from the standpoint of manufacture alone Ure says, "This appropriation ... 
to each, a workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally assigned, 
forms the very essence of division of labour." On the other hand, he describes 
this division as "adaptation of labour to the different talents of men," 
and lastly, characterises the whole manufacturing system as "a system for 
the division or gradation of labour," as "the division of labour into degrees of 
skill," &amp;c (Ure, I. c , pp 19-23 passim.) 

2 "Each handicraftsman being .. enabled to perfect himself by practice 
in one point, became ... a cheaper workman." (Ure, 1. c, p. 19) 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 351 

and the social division of labour, which forms the foundation of 
all production of commodities. 

If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separa- 
tion of social production into its main divisions or genera— viz., 
agriculture, industries, &amp;c, as division of labour in general, and 
the splitting up of these families into species and sub-species, as 
division of labour in particular, and the division of labour within 
the workshop as division of labour in singular or in detail. 1 

Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying 
down of individuals to a particular calling, develops itself, just as 
does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting- 
points. Within a family, 2 and after further development within a 
tribe, there springs up naturally a division of labour, caused by 
differences of sex and age, a division that is consequently based 
on a purely physiological foundation, which division enlarges its 
materials by the expansion of the community, by the increase of 
population, and more especially, by the conflicts between differ- 
ent tribes, and the subjugation of one tribe by another. On the other 
hand, as I have before remarked, the exchange of products springs 
up at the points where different families, tribes, communities, 
come in contact; for, in the beginning of civilisation, it is not pri- 
vate individuals but families, tribes, &amp;c, that meet on an inde- 
pendent footing. Different communities find different means of 
production, and different means of subsistence in their natural en- 
vironment. Hence, their modes of production, and of living, and 
their products are different. It is this spontaneously developed 



1 "Division of labour proceeds from the separation of professions the 
most widely different to that division, where several labourers divide between 
them the preparation of one and the same product, as in manufacture. "(Storch: 
"Cours d'Econ. Pol.," Paris Edn. t. I., p. 173.) "Nous rencontrons chez 
les peuples parvenus a un certain degr6 de civilisation trois genres de 
divisions d'industrie: la premiere, que nous nommerons generale, amene 
la distinction des producteurs en agriculteurs, manufacturiers et com- 
mercants, elle se rapporte aux trois principales branches d'industrie natio- 
nale; la seconde, qu'on pourrait appeler sp^ciale, e9t la division de chaque 
genre d'industrie en especes ... la troisieme division d'industrie, celle enfin 
qu'on devrait qualifier de division de la besogne ou de travail proprement 
dit, est celle qui s'etablit dans les arts et les metiers separes ... qui s'etablit 
dans la plupart des manufactures et des ateliers." (Skarbek, 1. c, pp. 84, 85.) 
2 Note to the third edition.— Subsequent very searching study of the 
primitive condition of man, led the author to the conclusion, that it was 
not the family that originally developed into the tribe, but that, on the con- 
trary, the tribe was the primitive and spontaneously developed form of 
human association, on the basis of blood relationship, and that out of the first 
incipient loosening of the tribal bonds, the many and various forms of the 
family were afterwards developed. — F. E. 



352 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



difference which, when different communities come in contact, 
calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the consequent 
gradual conversion of those products into commodities. Exchange 
does not create the differences between the spheres of production, 
but brings what are already different into relation, and thus con- 
verts them into more or less inter-dependent branches of the collec- 
tive production of an enlarged society. In the latter case, the so- 
cial division of labour arises from the exchange between spheres 
of production, that are originally distinct and independent of one 
another. In the former, where the physiological division of labour 
is the starting-point, the particular organs of a compact whole 
grow loose, and break off, principally owing to the exchange of 
commodities with foreign communities, and then isolate them- 
selves so far, that the sole bond, still connecting the various kinds 
of work, is the exchange of the products as commodities. In the 
one case, it is the making dependent what was before independent; 
in the other case, the making independent what was before de- 
pendent. 

The foundation of every division of labour that is well devel- 
oped, and brought about by the exchange of commodities, is the 
separation between town and country. 1 It may be said, that the 
whole economic history of society is summed up in the movement 
of this antithesis. We pass it over, however, for the present. 

Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed labour- 
ers are the material pre-requisites for division of labour in manu- 
facture, so are the number and density of the population, which 
here correspond to the agglomeration in one workshop, a necessary 
condition for the division of labour in society. 2 Nevertheless, this 
density is more or less relative. A relatively thinly populated coun- 
try, with well-developed means of communication, has a denser 
population than a more numerously populated country, with bad- 



1 Sir James Steuart is the economist who has handled this subject 
best. How little his book, which appeared ten years before the "Wealth 
of Nations," is known, even at the present time, may be judged from the fact 
that the admirers of Malthus do not even know that the first edition of the 
latter's work on population contains, except in the purely declamatory part, 
very little but extracts from Steuart, and in a less degree, from Wallace and 
Townsend. 

2 "There is a certain density of population which is convenient, both 
tor social intercourse, and for that combination ot powers by which the prod- 
uce of labour is increased." (James Mill, I. c, p 50.) "As the number of 
labourers increases, the productive power of society augments in the compound 
ratio of that increase, multiplied by the effects of the division of labour." 
(Th. Hodgskin, 1. c, pp. 125, 126.) 



DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 353 

ly-developed means of communication; and in this sense the North- 
ern States of the American Union, for instance, are more thickly 
populated than India. * 

Since the production and the circulation of commodities are 
the general pre-requisites of the capitalist mode of production, 
division of labour in manufacture demands, that division of labour 
in society at large should previously have attained a certain de- 
gree of development. Inversely, the former division reacts upon and 
develops and multiplies the latter. Simultaneously, with the differ- 
entiation of the instruments of labour, the industries that produce 
these instruments, become more and more differentiated. 2 If the 
manufacturing system seize upon an industry, which, previously, 
was carried on in connexion with others, either as a chief or as a 
subordinate industry, and by one producer, these industries imme- 
diately separate their connexion, and become independent. If it 
seize upon a particular stage in the production of a commodity, the 
other stages of its production become converted into so many in- 
dependent industries. It has already been stated, that where the 
finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted togeth- 
er, the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine 
and separate handicrafts. In order to carry out more perfectly the 
division of labour in manufacture, a single branch of production 
is, according to the varieties of its raw material, or the various 
forms that one and the same raw material may assume, split up 
into numerous, and to some extent, entirely new manufactures. 
Accordingly, in France alone, in the first half of the 18th century, 
over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs were woven, and, in Avig- 
non, it was law, that "every apprentice should devote himself tr&gt; 
only one sort of fabrication, and should not learn the preparation 
of several kinds of stuff at once." The territorial division of la- 
bour, which confines special branches of production to special dis- 
tricts of a country, acquires fresh stimulus from the manufactur- 
ing system, which exploits every special advantage. 3 The Co- 



1 In consequence of the great demand for cotton alter 1861, the pro- 
duction of cotton, in some thickly populated districts of India, was extend- 
ed at the expense of rice cultivation. In consequence there arose local fam- 
ines, the defective means of communication not permitting the failure of 
rice in one district to be compensated by importation from another 

2 Thus the fabrication of shuttles formed, as early as the 17th century, 
a special branch of industry in Holland. 

8 Whether the woollen manufacture ol england is not divided into 
several parts or branches appropriated to particular places, where they are 
only or principally manufactured; fine cloths in Somersetshire, coarse in 
Yorkshire, long ells at Exeter, soies at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys 



354 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

lonial system and the opening out of the markets of the world, 
both of which are included in the general conditions of existence of 
the manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing the 
division of labour in society. It is not the place, here, to go on to 
show how division of labour seizes upon, not only the economic, 
but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the founda- 
tion of that all engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, 
that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense 
of all other faculties, which caused A. Ferguson, the master of 
Adam Smith, to exclaim: "We make a nation of Helots, and have 
no free citizens." x 

But, in spite of the numerous analogies and links connecting 
them, division of labour in the interior of a society, and that in 
the interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but also in 
kind. The analogy appears most indisputable where there is an 
invisible bond uniting the various branches of trade. For instance 
the cattle-breeder produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into 
leather, and the shoemaker, the leather into boots. Here the thing 
produced by each of them is but a step towards the final form, 
which is the product of all their labours combined. There are, be- 
sides, all the various industries that supply the cattle-breeder, the 
tanner, and the shoemaker with the means of production. Now it 
is quite possible to imagine, with Adam Smith, that the difference 
between the above social division of labour, and the division in 
manufacture, is merely subjective, exists merely for the observer, 
who, in a manufacture, can see with one glance, all the numerous 
operations being performed on one spot, while in the instance giv- 
en above, the spreading out of the work over great areas, and the 
great number of people employed in each branch of labour, obscure 
the connexion. 2 But what is it that forms the bond between the 



at Kendal, blankets at Whitney, and so forth." (Berkeley:"The Quenist," 
1751, § 520.) 

1 A. Ferguson: "History of Civil Society." Edinburgh, 1767; Part iv, 
sect, ii., p. 285. 

2 In manufacture proper, he says, the division of labour appears to 
be greater, because "those employed in every different branch of the work 
can often be collected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under 
the view of the spectator. In those great manufactures, (!) on the contrary, 
which are destined to supply the great wants of the great body of the 
people, every different branch of the work employs so great a number of work- 
men, that it is impossible to collect them all into the same workhouse... 
the division is not near so obvious." (A. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," bk. i, 
ch. i.) The celebrated passage in the same chapter that begins with the words, 
"Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day-labourer 
in a civilised and thriving country," &amp;c, and then proceeds to depict what 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 355 

independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the 
shoemaker? It is the fact that their respective products are commod- 
ities. What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in 
manufactures? The fact that the detail labourer produces no com- 
modities. x It is only the common product of all the detail labour- 
ers that becomes a commodity. 2 Division of labour in society is 
brought about by the purchase and sale of the products of different 
branches of industry, while the connexion between the detail op- 
erations in a workshop, is due to the sale of the labour-power of 
several workmen to one capitalist, who applies it as combined 
labour-power. The division of labour in the workshop implies con- 
centration of the means of production in the hands of one capitalist; 
the division of labour in society implies their dispersion among 
many independent producers of commodities. While within the 
workshop, the iron law of proportionality subjects definite num- 
bers of workmen to definite functions, in the society outside the 
workshop, chance and caprice have full play in distributing the 
producers and their means of production among the various branches 
of industry. The different spheres of production, it is true, con- 
stantly tend to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while each 



an enormous number and variety of industries contribute to the satisfaction 
of the wants of an ordinary labourer, is copied almost word for word from B. 
de Mandeville's Remarks to his "Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices, Pub- 
lick Benefits." (First ed., without the remarks, 1706; with the remarks, 1714.) 
1 "There is no longer anything which we can call the natural reward of 
individual labour. Each labourer produces only some part of a whole, and 
each part, having no value or utility in itself, there is nothing on which 
the labourer can seize, and say: It is my product, this 1 will keep to myself." 
("Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital." Lond., 1825, p. 25.) The 
author of this admirable work is the Th. Hodgskin 1 have already cited. 

2 This distinction between division of labour in society and in manu- 
facture, was practically illustrated to the Yankees. One of the new taxes 
devised at Washington during the civil war, was the duty of 6% "on all 
industrial products." Question: What is an industrial product? Answer of 
the legislature: A thing is produced "when it is made," and it is made when 
it is ready for sale. Now, for one example out of many. The New York and 
Philadelphia manufacturers had previously been in the habit of "making" 
umbrellas with all their belongings. But since an umbrella is a mixtum 
compositum of very heterogeneous parts, by degrees these parts became the 
products of various separate industries, carried on independently in different 
places. They entered as separate commodities into the umbrella manufactory, 
where they were fitted together. The Yankees have given to articles thus 
fitted together, the name of "assembled articles," a name they deserve, for 
being an assemblage of taxes. Thus the umbrella "assembles," first, 6% on 
the price of each of its elements, and a further 6% on its own total price. 



356 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

producer of a commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to satisfy 
a particular social want, and while the extent of these wants dif- 
fers quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which set- 
tles their proportions into a regular system, and that system one 
of spontaneous growth; and, on the other hand, the law of the val- 
ue of commodities ultimately determines how much of its dis- 
posable working-time society can expend on each particular class 
of commodities. But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the 
various spheres of production, is exercised, only in the shape of 
a reaction against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium. The a 
priori system on which the division of labour, within the workshop, 
is regularly carried out, becomes in the division of labour within 
the society, an a posteriori, nature-imposed necessity, controlling 
the lawless caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the baro- 
metrical fluctuations of the market-prices. Division of labour with- 
in the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capi- 
talist over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs 
to him. The division of labour within the society brings into con- 
tact independent commodity-producers, who acknowledge no oth- 
er authority but that of competition, of the coercion exerted by 
the pressure of their mutual interests; just as in the animal kingdom, 
the bellum omnium contra omnes more or less preserves the condi- 
tions of existence of every species. The same bourgeois mind which 
praises division of labour in the workshop, life-long annexation 
of the labourer to a partial operation, and his complete subjection 
to capital, as being an organisation of labour that increases its 
productiveness — that same bourgeois mind denounces with equal 
vigour every conscious attempt to socially control and regulate 
the process of production, as an inroad upon such sacred things as 
the rights of property, freedom and unrestricted play for the bent 
of the individual capitalist. It is very characteristic that the 
enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing more 
damning to urge against a general organisation of the labour of 
society, than that it would turn all society into one immense fac- 
tory. 

If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the so- 
cial division of labour and despotism in that of the workshop are 
mutual conditions the one of the other, we find, on the contrary, 
in those earlier forms of society in which the separation of trades 
has been spontaneously developed, then crystallised, and finally 
made permanent by law, on the one hand, a specimen of the organi- 
sation of the labour of society, in accordance with an approved and 
authoritative plan, and on the other, the entire exclusion of divi- 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 357 

sion of labour in the workshop, or at all events a mere dwarf- 
like or sporadic and accidental development of the same. * 

Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some 
of which have continued down to this day, are based on possession 
in common of the land, on the blending of agriculture and handi- 
crafts, and on an unalterable division of labour, which serves, 
whenever a new community is started, as a plan and scheme ready 
cut and dried. Occupying areas of from 100 up to several thousand 
acres, each forms a compact whole producing all it requires. The 
chief part of the products is destined for direct use by the communi- 
ty itself, and does not take the form of a commodity. Hence, pro- 
duction here is independent of that division of labour brought 
about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the exchange of 
commodities. It is the surplus alone that becomes a commodity, 
and a portion of even that, not until it has reached the hands of 
the State, into whose hands from time immemorial a certain quan- 
tity of these products has found its way in the shape of rent in kind. 
The constitution of these communities varies in different parts 
of India. In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common, 
and the produce divided among the members. At the same time, 
spinning and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary 
industries. Side by side with the masses thus occupied with one and 
the same work, we find the "chief inhabitant," who is judge, police, 
and tax-gatherer in one; the book-keeper, who keeps the accounts 
of the tillage and registers everything relating thereto; another 
official, who prosecutes criminals, protects strangers travelling 
through and escorts them to the next village; the boundary man, 
who guards the boundaries against neighbouring communities; the 
water-overseer, who distributes the water from the common tanks 
for irrigation; the Brahmin, who conducts the religious services; 
the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches the children reading and 
writing; the calendar-Brahmin, or astrologer, who makes known 
the lucky or unlucky days for seed-time and harvest, and for every 
other kind of agricultural work; a smith and a carpenter, who 
make and repair all the agricultural implements; the potter, who 
makes all the pottery of the village; the barber, the washerman, 
who washes clothes, the silversmith, here and there the poet, who 



1 "On peut ... etablir en regie generale, que moins l'autorite preside 
a la division du travail dans l'interieur de la societe, plus la division du 
travail se developpe dans l'interieur de l'atelier, et plus elle y est soumise 
a l'autorite d'unseul. Ainsi l'autorite dans l'atelier et celle dans la societe, 
par rapport a la division du travail, sent en raison inverse l'une de l'autre." 
(Karl Marx, "Misere", &amp;c, pp. 130-131.) 



358 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

in some communities replaces the silversmith, in others the school- 
master. This dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense of 
the whole community. If the population increases, a new commu- 
nity is founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land. 
The whole mechanism discloses a systematic division of labour; 
but a division like that in manufactures is impossible, since the 
smith and the carpenter, &amp;c, find an unchanging market, and at 
the most there occur, according to the sizes of the villages, two or 
three of each, instead of one. * The law that regulates the division 
of labour in the community acts with the irresistible authority of 
a law of Nature, at the same time that each individual artificer, 
the smith, the carpenter, and so on, conducts in his workshop all 
the operations of his handicraft in the traditional way, but inde- 
pendently, and without recognising any authority over him. The 
simplicity of the organisation for production in these self-sufficing 
communities that constantly reproduce themselves in the same 
form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up again on the 
spot and with the same name 2 — this simplicity supplies the key 
to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies, an un- 
changeableness in such striking contrast with the constant dissolu- 
tion and refounding of Asiatic States, and the never-ceasing changes 
of dynasty. The structure of the economic elements of society re- 
mains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky. 

The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most 
strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a single 
master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist. 
Moreover, he could not employ his journeymen in many other 
handicrafts than the one in which qe was a master. The guilds zeal- 
ously repelled every encroachment by the capital of merchants, the 
only form of free capital with which they came in contact. A mer- 



1 Lieut. -Col. Mark Wilks: "Historical Sketches of the South of India.'* 
Lond., 1810-17, v. I., pp. 118-20. A good description of the various forms 
of the Indian communities is to be found in George Campbell's "Modern In- 
dia." Lond., 1852. 

2 "Under this simple form ... the inhabitants of the country have lived 
from time immemorial The boundaries of the villages have been but seldom 
altered; and though the villages themselves have been sometimes injured, 
and even desolated by war, famine, and disease, the same name, the same 
limits, the same interests, and even the same families, have continued for 
ages. The inhabitants give themselves no trouble about the breaking up and 
division of kingdoms; while the village remains entire, they care not to what 
power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; its internal economy 
remains unchanged." (Th. Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. Gov. of Java: "The 
History of Java." Lond., 1817, Vol. I., p. 285.) 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 359 

chant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commod- 
ity he could not buy. He existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in 
the products of the handicrafts. If circumstances called for a fur- 
ther division of labour, the existing guilds split themselves up into 
varieties, or founded new guilds by the side of the old ones; all 
this, however, without concentrating various handicrafts in a sin- 
gle workshop. Hence, the guild organisation, however much it may 
have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting the 
handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the existence of 
manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop. On the 
whole, the labourer and his means of production remained closely 
united, like the snail with its shell, and thus there was wanting the 
principal basis of manufacture, the separation of the labourer from 
his means of production, and the conversion of these means into 
capital. 

While division of labour in society at large, whether such 
division be brought about or not by exchange of commodities, is 
common to economic formations of society the most diverse, 
division of labour in the workshop, as practised by manufacture, 
is a special creation of the capitalist mode of production alone. 



SECTION 5.— THE CAPITALISTIC CHARACTER OF MANUFACTURE 

An increased number of labourers under the control of one 
capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation 
generally, as of manufacture in particular. But the division of la- 
bour in manufacture makes this increase in the number of workmen 
a technical necessity. The minimum number that any given capi- 
talist is bound to employ is here prescribed by the previously es- 
tablished division of labour. On the other hand, the advantages of 
further division are obtainable only by adding to the number of 
workmen, and this can be done only by adding multiples of the va- 
rious detail groups. But an increase in the variable component of 
the capital employed necessitates an increase in its constant 
component, too, in the workshops, implements, &amp;c, and, in partic- 
ular, in the raw material, the call for which grows quicker 
than the number of workmen. The quantity of it consumed in a giv- 
en time, by a given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio 
as does the productive power of that labour in consequence of its 
division. Hence, it is a law, based on the very nature of manufac- 
ture, that the minimum amount of capital, which is bound to be in 
the hands of each capitalist, must keep increasing; in other words, 



360 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

that the transformation into capital of the social means of produc- 
tion and subsistence must keep extending. 1 

In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collec- 
tive working organism is a form of existence of capital. The mech- 
anism that is made up of numerous individual detail labourers 
belongs to the capitalist. Hence, the productive power resulting 
from a combination of labours appears to be the productive power 
of capital. Manufacture proper not only subjects the previously in- 
dependent workman to the discipline and command of capital, but, 
in addition, creates a hierarchic gradation of the workmen them- 
selves. While simple co-operation leaves the mode of working by 
the individual for the most part unchanged, manufacture thorough- 
ly revolutionises it, and seizes labour-power by its very roots. 
It converts the labourer into a crippled monstrosity, by forc- 
ing his detail dexterity at the expense of a world of productive 
capabilities and instincts; just as in the States of La Plata they 
butcher a whole beast for the sake of his hide or his tallow. Not only 
is the detail work distributed to the different individuals, but the 
individual himself is made the automatic motor of a fractional 
operation, 2 and the absurd fable of Menenius Agrippa, which makes 
man a mere fragment of his own body, becomes realised. 3 If, 
at first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the 
material means of producing a commodity fail him, now his very 
labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital. 
Its functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists 
in the workshop of the capitalist after the sale. By nature un- 
fitted to make anything independently, the manufacturing labour- 
er develops productive activity as a mere appendage of the capital- 



1 "It is not sufficient that the capital" (the writer should have said 
the necessary means of subsistence and of production) "required for the sub- 
division of handicrafts should be in readiness in the society: it must also 
be accumulated in the hands of the employers in sufficiently large quantities 
to enable them to conduct their operations ona large scale.... The more the di- 
vision increases, the more does the constant employment of a given number 
of labourers require a greater outlay of capital in tools, raw material, &amp;c." 
(Storch: "Cours d'Econ. Polit." Paris Ed., t. I., pp. 250, 251.) - La concen- 
tration des instruments de production et la division du travail sont aussi 
inseparables Tune de l'autre que le sont, dans le regime politique, la concentra- 
tion des pouvoirs publics et la division des inte&gt;ets priv£s." (Karl Marx, I. c, 
p. 134) 

2 Dugald Stewart calls manufacturing labourers "living automatons ... 
employed in the details of the work." (1. c, p. 318.) 

8 In corals, each individual is, in fact, the stomach of the whole group; 
but it supplies the group with nourishment, instead of, like the Roman 
patrician, withdrawing it. 



DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 361 

ist's workshop. 1 As the chosen people bore in their features the 
sign manual of Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufac- 
turing workman as the property of capital. 

The knowledge, the judgment, and the will, which, though 
in ever so small a degree, are practised by the independent peasant 
or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole 
art of war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning— these 
faculties are now required only for the workshop as a whole. Intel- 
ligence in production expands in one direction, because it van- 
ishes in many others. What is lost by the detail labourers, is con- 
centrated in the capital that employs them. 2 It is a result of the di- 
vision of labour in manufactures, that the labourer is brought face 
to face with the intellectual potencies of the material process of 
production, as the property of another, and as a ruling power. 
This separation begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist 
represents to the single workman, the oneness and the will of the as- 
sociated labour. It is developed in manufacture which cuts down 
the labourer into a detail labourer. It is completed in modern indus- 
try, which makes science a productive force distinct from labour 
and presses it into the service of capital. 3 

In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, 
and through him capital, rich in social productive power, each 
labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers. 
"Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. 
Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving 
the hand or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, 
accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, 
and where the workshop may ... be considered as an engine, 



1 "L'ouvrier qui porte dans ses bras tout un metier, peut aller partout 
exercer son industrie et trouver des moyens de subsister: 1'autre (the manu- 
facturing labourer) n'est qu'un accessoire qui, separe de ses confreres, n'a 
plus ni capacite, ni independance, et qui se trouve force d'accepter_ la loi 
qu'on juge a propos de lui imposer." (Storch., 1. c, Petersb edit., 1815, t. I., 
p. 204.) 

2 A. Ferguson, 1. c, p. 281: "The former may have gained what the 
other has lost." 

3 "The man of knowledge and the productive labourer come to be 
widely divided from each other, and knowledge, instead of remaining the 
handmaid of labour in the hand of the labourer to increase his productive pow- 
ers ... has almost every where arrayed itself against labour ... systematically 
deluding and leading them (the labourers) astray in order to render their 
muscular powers entirely mechanical and obedient." (W. Thompson: 'An 
Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth." London, 1824, 
p. 274.) 



362 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the parts of which are men." 1 As a matter of fact, some few man- 
ufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred, for cer- 
tain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half-idiotic 
persons. 2 

"The understandings of the greater part of men," says Adam 
Smith, "are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. 
The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple 
operations . . . has no occasion to exert his understanding. 
.... He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is pos- 
sible for a human creature to become." After describing the stu- 
pidity of the detail labourer he goes on: "The uniformity of his 
stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind .... 
It corrupts even the activity of his body and renders him inca- 
pable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any 
other employments than that to which he has been bred. His dexter- 
ity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be acquired 
at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues. 
But in every improved and civilised society, this is the state into 
which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, 
must necessarily fall." 8 For preventing the complete deterioration 
of the great mass of the people by division of labour, A. Smith 
recommends education of the people by the State, but prudently, 
and in homoeopathic doses. G. Garnier, his French translator and 
commentator, who, under the first French Empire, quite naturally 
developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him on this 
point. Education of the masses, he urges, violates the first law 
of the division of labour, and with it "our whole social system 
would be proscribed." "Like all other divisions of labour," he 
says, "that between hand labour and head labour 4 is more pro- 



1 A. Ferguson, 1. c, p. 280. 

2 J. D. Tuckett: "A History of the Past and Present State of the La- 
bouring Population." Lond. 1846. 

3 A. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," Bk. v., ch. i, art. ii. Being a pupil 
of A. Ferguson who showed the disadvantageous effects of division of labour, 
Adam Smith was perfectly clear on this point. In the introduction to his 
work, where he ex p rofesso praises division of labour, he indicates only in a 
cursory manner that it is the source of social inequalities. It is not till the 
5th Book, on the Revenue of the State, that he reproduces Ferguson. In my 
"Misere de la Philosophic" I have sufficiently explained the historical con- 
nexion between Ferguson, A. Smith, Lemontey, and Say, as regards their 
criticisms of Division of Labour, and have shown, for the first time, that 
Division of Labour as practised in manufactures, is a specific form of the 
capitalist mode of production. 

4 Ferguson had already said, 1. c, p. 281: "And thinking itself, in this 
age of separations, may become a peculiar craft." 



DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 363 

nounced and decided in proportion as society (he rightly uses this 
word, for capital, landed property and their State) becomes 
richer. This division of labour, like every other, is an effect of 
past, and a cause of future progress . . . ought the government 
then to work in opposition to this division of labour, and to 
hinder its natural course? Ought it to expend a part of the public 
money in the attempt to confound and blend together two classes 
of labour, which are striving after division and separation?" 1 

Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from 
division of labour in society as a whole. Since, however, manu- 
facture carries this social separation of branches of labour much 
further, and also, by its peculiar division, attacks the individual 
at the very roots of his life, it is the first to afford the materials 
for, and to give a start to, industrial pathology. 2 

"To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the 
sentence, to assassinate him if he does not. . . . The subdivision 
of labour is the assassination of a people." 3 

Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, 
manufacture, commences as a spontaneous formation. So soon 
as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the rec- 
ognised methodical and systematic form of capitalist production. 
History shows how the division of labour peculiar to manu- 
facture, strictly so called, acquires the best adapted form at first 
by experience, as it were behind the backs of the actors, and then, 
like the guild handicrafts, strives to hold fast that form when 
once found, and here and there succeeds in keeping it for centu- 
ries. Any alteration in this form, except in trivial matters, is 



1 G. Gamier, vol. V. of his translation of A. Smith, pp. 4-5. 

2 Ramazzini, professor of practical medicine at Padua, published 
in 1713 his work "De morbis artiflcum", which was translated into French 
1781, reprinted 1841 in the "Encyclopedic des Sciences Medicales. 7me Dis. 
Auteurs Glassiques.* The period of Modern Mechanical Industry has, of course, 
very much enlarged his catalogue of labour's diseases. See "Hygiene phy- 
sique et morale de l'ouvrier dans les grandes villes en general et dans la 
ville de Lyon en particulier. Par le Dr. A. L. Fonteret, Paris, 1858," and "Die 
Krankheiten, welche verschiednen Standen, Altern und Geschlechtern eigen- 
thumlich sind. 6 Vols. Ulm, 1860," and others. In 1854 the Society of Arts 
appointed a Commission of Inquiry into industrial pathology. The list of 
documents collected by this commission is to be seen in the catalogue of 
the "Twickenham Economic Museum." Very important are the official "Re- 
ports on Public Health." See also Eduard Reich, M. D. "Ueber die Entar- 
tung des Menschen," Erlangen, 1868. 

3 (D. Urquhart: "Familiar Words." Lond., 1855, p. 119.) Hegel held 
very heretical views on division of labour. In his "Rechtsphilosophie" he says: 
"By well educated men we understand in the first instance, those who can do 
everything that others do." 



364 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of labour. Mod- 
ern manufacture wherever it arises — I do not here allude to 
modern industry based on machinery— either finds the disjecta 
membra poetse ready to hand, and only waiting to be collected 
together, as is the case in the manufacture of clothes in large towns, 
or it can easily apply the principle of division, simply by ex- 
clusively assigning the various operations of a handicraft (such 
as book-binding) to particular men. In such cases, a week's expe- 
rience is enough to determine the proportion between the num- 
bers of the hands necessary for the various functions. * 

By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the in- 
struments of labour, by the formation of detail labourers, and by 
grouping and combining the latter into a single mechanism, 
division of labour in manufacture creates a qualitative grada- 
tion, and a quantitative proportion in the social process of 
production; it consequently creates a definite organisation of the 
labour of society, and thereby develops at the same time new 
productive forces in the society. In its specific capitalist form — 
and under the given conditions, it could take no other form than 
a capitalistic one— manufacture is but a particular method of 
begetting relative surplus-value, or of augmenting at the ex- 
pense of the labourer the self-expansion of capital— usually 
called social wealth, "Wealth of Nations," &amp;c. It increases the 
social productive power of labour, not only for the benefit of the 
capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but it does this by 
crippling the individual labourers. It creates new conditions 
for the lordship of capital over labour. If, therefore, on the one 
hand, it presents itself historically as a progress and as a neces- 
sary phase in the economic development of society, on the other 
hand, it is a refined and civilised method of exploitation. 

Political Economy, which as an independent science, first 
sprang into being during the period of manufacture, views the 
social division of labour only from the standpoint of manufac- 
ture, 2 and sees in it only the means of producing more commodities 



1 The simple belief in the inventive genius exercised a priori by the 
individual capitalist in division of labour, exists now-a-days only among 
German professors, of the stamp of Herr Roscher, who, to recompense the cap- 
italist from whose Jovian head division of labour sprang ready formed, 
dedicates to him "various wages" (diverse Arbeitslohne). The more or less 
extensive application of division of labour depends on length of purse, not 
on greatness of genius. 

2 The older writers, like Petty and the anonymous Author of "Advan- 
tages of the East. India Trade," bring out the capitalist character of division 
of labour as applied in manufacture more than A. Smith does. 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 365 

with a given quantity of labour, and, consequently, of cheapen- 
ing commodities and hurrying on the accumulation of capital. 
In most striking contrast with this accentuation of quantity and 
exchange- value, is the attitude of the writers of classical antiqui- 
ty, who hold exclusively by quality and use-value. * In consequence 
of the separation of the social branches of production, commodi- 
ties are better made, the various bents and talents of men select 
a suitable field, 2 and without some restraint no important results 
can be obtained anywhere. 3 Hence both product and producer are 
improved by division of labour. If the growth of the quantity 
produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with 
reference to the greater abundance of use-values. There is not a 
word alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodi- 
ties. This aspect, from the standpoint of use-value alone, is taken 
as well by Plato, 4 who treats division of labour as the foundation 
on which the division of society into classes is based, as by 



1 Amongst the moderns may be excepted a few writers of the 18th 
century, like Beccaria and James Harris, who with regard to division of 
labour almost entirely follow the ancients. Thus, Beccaria: "Ciascuno prova 
coll'esperienza, che applicando la mano e l'ingegno sempre alio stesso genere 
di opere e di produtte, egli piu facili, piu abbondanti e migliori ne traca 
risultati, di quellochese ciascuno isolatamente le cose tutte a se necessarie 
soltanto facesse.... Dividendosi in tal maniera per la comune e privata uti- 
lita gli uomini in varie classi e condizioni." (Cesare Beccaria: "Elementi di 
Econ. Pubblica," ed. Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. xi, p. 29.) James Harris, 
afterwards Earl of Malmesbury, celebrated for the "Diaries" of his embassy 
at St. Petersburg, says in a note to his "Dialogue Concerning Happiness," 
Lond., 1741, reprinted afterwards in "Three Treatises, &amp;c," 3 Ed., Lond., 
1772: "The whole argument to prove society natural (i.e., by division of 
employments) ... is taken from the second book of Plato's Republic." 

2 Thus, in the Odyssey xiv., 228, "AUo&lt;; fop t'SUoicjiv dvtjp femt.pTtetai fpYOi?," 
and Archilochus in Saxtus Empiricus, "aUo? aX^ in' ipy&lt;? /ap5t7)v laivsfai." 

8 "rioM' Y]jucrcct!o !pY«, xaxaiq 8'rjiwnaTo rcdvra." Every Athenian considered 
himself superior as a producer of commodities to a Spartan; for the latter in 
time of war had men enough at his disposal but could not command money, as 
Thucydides makes Pericles say in the speech inciting the Athenians to 
the Peloponnesian war: "ocoptaai te ItoijioTepoi ol auTo-jpYoi T&lt;5v av»p»iwv rj 
xpijliaoi ™XepLsTv." (Thuc: 1 , l*c. 41 .) Nevertheless, even with regard to ma- 
terial production, o-itapxeia, as opposed to division of labour remained their 
ideal, "7tap'covYap to, eo, napa xootcov xat to auTapxe?." It should be mentioned 
here that at the date of the fall of the 30 Tyrants there were still not 5,000 
Athenians without landed property. 

4 With Plato, division of labour within the community is a develop- 
ment from the multifarious requirements, and the limited capacities of indi- 
viduals. The main point with him is, that the labourer must adapt himself 
to the work, not the work to the labourer; which latter is unavoidable, it he 
carries on several trades at once, thus making one or the other of them subor- 



366 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Xenophon, * who with characteristic bourgeois instinct, approaches 
more nearly to division of labour within the workshop. Plato's 
Republic, in so far as division of labour is treated in it, as 
the formative principle of the State, is merely the Athenian 
idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes, Egypt having 
served as the model of an industrial country to many of 
his contemporaries also, amongst others to Isocrates, 2 and it 



dinate. "Oo y^P MMAei to 7cpaTT6jievov Ttjv Too irpdixovTo; a^oX-gv 7Upi|i«veiv, dXX' 
avaifXT) tov 7tpattovra tq&gt; TrpaxTOiicvw iTraxoXoo&amp;eiv jxyj h Tzapipyoo jitpet. — 'Avdfxr). — 
'Ex 8tj tootcdv tcXsiu&gt; te fxaara YifvsTai xat xdXXiov xai paov, otav zl$ fv xa?a cpomv 
xai iv xatpi axoX-rjv tuiv aXXu&gt;v af&lt;ov, rcparq)." (Rep. 1. 2. Ed. Baiter, 

Orelli, &amp;c). So in Thucydides, 1. c, c. 142: "Seafaring is an art like 
any other, and cannot, as circumstances require, be carried on as a 
subsidiary occupation; nay, other subsidiary occupations cannot be car- 
ried on alongside of this one." If the work, says Plato, has to wait for 
the labourer, the critical point in the process is missed and the article 
spoiled, "fpfo'j xaipov SioXXorai." The same Platonic idea is found recurring 
in the protest of the English bleachers against the clause in the Factory Act 
that provides fixed meal-times for all operatives. Their business cannot wait 
the convenience of the workmen, for "in the various operations of singeing, 
washing, bleaching, mangling, calendering, and dyeing, none of them can 
be stopped at a given moment without risk of damage ... to enforce the same 
dinner hour for all the workpeople might occasionally subject valuable 
goods to the risk of danger by incomplete operations." Le platonisme ou 
va-t-il se nicher! 

1 Xenophon says, it is not only an honour to receive food from the 
table of the King of Persia, but such food is much more tasty than other 
food. "And there is nothing wonderful in this, for as the other arts are brought 
to special perfection in the great towns, so the royal food is prepared in a 
special way. For in the small towns the same man makes bedsteads, doors, 
ploughs, and tables: often, too, he builds houses into the bargain, and is 
quite content if he finds custom sufficient for his sustenance. It is altogether 
impossible for a man who does so many things to do them all well. But in 
the great towns, where each can find many buyers, one trade is sufficient to 
maintain the man who carries it on. Nay, there is often not even need of one 
complete trade, but one man makes shoes for men, another for women. Here 
and there one man gets a living by sewing, another by cutting out shoes; 
one does nothing but cut out clothes, another nothing but sew the pieces to- 
gether. It follows necessarily then, that he who does the simplest kind of work, 
undoubtedly does it better than anyone else. So it is with the art of cooking." 
(Xen. Cyrop. I. viii., c. 2.) Xenophon here lays stress exclusively upon the 
excellence to be attained in use-value, although he well knows that the gra- 
dations of the division of labour depend on the extent of the market. 

2 He (Busiris) divided them all into special castes ... commanded that 
the same individuals should always carry on the same trade, for he knew that 
they who change their occupations become skilled in none; but that those 
who constantly stick to one occupation bring it to the highest perfection. 
In truth, we shall also find that in relation to the arts and handicrafts, they 
have outstripped their rivals more than a master does a bungler; and the 
contrivances for maintaining the monarchy and the other institutions of 



DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 367 

continued to have this importance to the Greeks of the Roman 
Empire. * 

During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period dur- 
ing which manufacture is the predominant form taken by capital- 
ist production, many obstacles are opposed to the full develop- 
ment of the peculiar tendencies of manufacture. Although 
manufacture creates, as we have already seen, a simple separation 
of the labourers into skilled and unskilled, simultaneously with 
their hierarchic arrangement in classes, yet the number of the 
unskilled labourers, owing to the preponderating influence of the 
skilled, remains very limited. Although it adapts the detail oper- 
ations to the various degrees of maturity, strength, and develop- 
ment of the living instruments of labour, thus conducing to ex- 
ploitation of women and children, yet this tendency as a whole 
is wrecked on the habits and the resistance of the male labourers. 
Although the splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of form- 
ing the workman, and thereby lowers his value, yet for the more 
difficult detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, 
even where it would be superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by 
the workmen. In England, for instance, we find the laws of ap- 
prenticeship, with their seven years' probation, in full force 
down to the end of the manufacturing period; and they are not 
thrown on one side till the advent of Modern Industry. Since 
handicraft skill is the foundation of manufacture, and since the 
mechanism of manufacture as a whole possesses no framework, 
apart from the labourers themselves, capital is constantly com- 
pelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the workmen. "By the 
infirmity of human nature," says friend Ure, "it happens that the 
more skilful the workman, the more self-willed and intractable 
he is apt to become, and of course the less fit a component of a 
mechanical system in which... he may do great damage to 
the whole." 2 Hence throughout the whole manufacturing period 
there runs the complaint of want of discipline among the workmen. 3 
And had we not the testimony of contemporary writers, the sim- 
ple facts, that during the period between the 16th century and the 
epoch of Modern Industry, capital failed to become the master of 



their State are so admirable that the most celebrated philosophers who treat 
of this subject praise the constitution of the Egyptian State above all others. 
(Isocrates, Bosiris, c. 8.) 

1 Cf. Diodorus Siculus. 

2 Ure, 1. c, p. 20. 

3 This is more the case in England than in France, and more in France 
than in Holland. 



368 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the whole disposable working-time of the manufacturing labour- 
ers, that manufactures are short-lived, and change their locality 
from one country to another with the emigrating or immigrating 
workmen, these facts would speak volumes. "Order must in one 
way or another be established," exclaims in 1770 the oft-cited 
author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." "Order," re-echoes 
Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years later, "Order" was wanting in manufac- 
ture based on "the scholastic dogma of division of labour," and 
"Arkwright created order." 

At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon 
the production of society to its full, extent, or to revolution- 
ise that production to its very core. It towered up as an econom- 
ic work of art, on the broad foundation of the town handi- 
crafts, and of the rural domestic industries. At a given stage in 
its development, the narrow technical basis on which manufacture 
rested, came into conflict with requirements of production that 
were created by manufacture itself. 

One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the 
production of the instruments of labour themselves, including 
especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already 
employed. A machine-factory, says Ure, "displayed the division 
of labour in manifold gradations— the file, the drill, the lathe, 
having each its different workman in the order of skill." (P. 21.) 
This workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufac- 
ture, produced in its turn — machines. It is they that sweep away 
the handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social 
production. Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for the 
life-long annexation of the workman to a detail function is re- 
moved. On the other hand, the fetters that this same principle 
laid on the dominion of capital, fall away. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



371 



PART IV.— (Continued) 

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 



CHAPTER XV 
MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 

SECT 19 N 1.— THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINERY 

John Stuart Mill says in his "Principles of Political Economy": 
"It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made 
have lightened the day's toil of any human being." 1 That is, 
however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application 
of machinery. Like every other increase in the productiveness of 
labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities, and, by 
shortening that portion of the working-day, in which the labourer 
works for himself, to lengthen the other portion that he gives, 
without an equivalent, to the capitalist. In short, it is a means for- 
producing surplus-value. 

In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production 
begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with 
the instruments of labour. Our first inquiry then is, how the in- 
struments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or 
what is the difference between a machine and the implements of 
a handicraft? We are only concerned here with striking and general 
characteristics; for epochs in the history of society are no more 
separated from each other by hard and fast lines of demarcation, 
than are geological epochs. 

Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are fol- 
lowed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, 
and a machine a complex tool. They see no essential difference 
between them, and even give the name of machine to the simple 
mechanical powers, the lever, the inclined plane, the screw, the 



1 Mill should have said, "of any human being not fed by other people's 
ur," for, without doubt, machinery has greatly increased the number 



labour, 

of well-to-do idlers 



372 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

wedge, &amp;c. ! As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination 
of those simple powers, no matter how they may be disguised. 
From the economic standpoint this explanation is worth noth- 
ing, because the historical element is wanting. Another expla- 
nation of the difference between tool and machine is that in the 
case of a tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power 
of a machine is something different from man, as is, for instance, an 
animal, water, wind, and so on. 2 According to this, a plough 
drawn by oxen, which is a contrivance common to the most dif- 
ferent epochs, would be a machine, while Claussen's circular loom, 
which, worked by a single labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, 
would be a mere tool. Nay, this very loom, though a tool when 
worked by hand, would, if worked by steam, be a machine. And 
since the application of animal power is one of man's earliest 
inventions, production by machinery would have preceded produc- 
tion by handicrafts. When in 1735, John Wyatt brought out 
his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of 
the 18th century, not a word did he say about an ass driving 
it instead of a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. He described 
it as a machine "to spin without fingers." 3 



1 See, for instance, Hutton: "Course of Mathematics." 

2 "From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction 
between a tool and a machine: spades, hammers, chisels, &amp;c, combinations 
of levers and of screws, in all of which, no matter how complicated they may 
be in other respects, man is the motive power, ... all this falls under the idea 
of a tool; but the plough, which is drawn by animal power, and wind-mills, 
&amp;c, must be classed among machines." (Wilhelm Schulz: "Die Bewegung 
der Produktion." Zurich, 1843, p. 38.) In many respects a book to be recom- 
mended. 

8 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had 
already been used, and Italy was probably the country of their first appear- 
ance. A critical history of technology would show how little any of the inven- 
tions of the 18th century are the work of a single individual. Hitherto there 
is no such book. Darwin has interested us in the history of Nature's Technol- 
ogy, »•«•! in the formation of the organs of plants and animals, which or- 
gans serve as instruments of production for sustaining life. Does not the his- 
tory of the productive organs of man, of organs that are the material basis 
of all social organisation, deserve equal attention? And would not such a 
history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says, human history differs from 
natural history in this, that we have made the. former, but not the latter? 
Technology discloses man's mode of dealing with Nature, the process of pro- 
duction by which he sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode 
of formation of his social relations, and of the mental conceptions that flow 
from them. Every history of religion even, that fails to take account of this 
material basis, is uncritical. It is, in reality, much easier to discover by 
analysis the earthly core of the misty creations of religion, than, conversely, 
it is, to develop from the actual relations of life the corresponding celestial- 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 373 

All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially 
different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, 
and finally the tool or working machine. The motor mechanism 
is that which puts the whole in motion. It either generates its own 
motive power, like the steam-engine, the caloric engine, the elec- 
tromagnetic machine, &amp;c, or it receives its impulse from some al- 
ready existing natural force, like the water-wheel from a head of 
water, the wind-mill from wind, &amp;c. The transmitting mechanism, 
composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels, pullies, straps, 
ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the most varied kinds, reg- 
ulates the motion, changes its form where necessary, as for in- 
stance, from linear to circular, and divides and distributes it 
among the working machines. These two first parts of the whole 
mechanism are there, solely for putting the working machines 
in motion, by means of which motion the subject of labour is 
seized upon and modified as desired. The tool or working machine 
is that part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution 
of the 18th century started. And to this day it constantly serves as 
such a starting-point, whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is 
turned into an industry carried on by 'machinery. 

On a closer examination of the working machine proper, we 
find in it, as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very 
altered forms, the apparatus and tools used by, the handicraftsman 
or manufacturing workman; with this difference, that instead of 
being human implements, they are the implements of a mechanism, 
or mechanical implements. Either the entire machine is only a 
more or less altered mechanical edition of the old handicraft tool, 
as, for instance, the power-loom, 1 or the working parts fitted in 
the frame of the machine are old acquaintances, as spindles are 
in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom, saws in a sawing-machine, 
and knives in a chopping machine. The distinction between these 
tools and the body proper of the machine, exists from their very 
birth; for they continue for the most part to be produced by hand- 
icraft, or by manufacture, and are afterwards fitted into the body 



ised forms of those relations. The latter method is the only materialistic, 
and therefore the only scientific one. The weak points in the abstract mate- 
rialism of natural science, a materialism that excludes history and its proc- 
ess are at once evident from the abstract and ideological conceptions of 
its spokesmen, whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own 
speciality. 

1 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, 
at the first glance, the ancient loom. In its modern form, the power-loom 
has undergone essential alterations. 



374 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of the machine, which is the product of machinery. 1 The machine 
proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in motion, 
performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly 
done by the workman with similar tools. Whether the motive pow- 
er is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes 
no difference in this respect. From the moment that the tool prop- 
er is taken from man, and fitted into a mechanism, a machine 
takes the place of a mere implement. The difference strikes one 
at once, even in those cases where man himself continues to be the 
prime mover. The number of implements that he himself can use 
simultaneously, is limited by the number of his own natural in- 
struments of production, by the number of his bodily organs. 
In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner work two 
spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both hands 
and both feet. This was too difficult. Later, a treddle spinning- 
wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, 
who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two- 
leaded men. The Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, 
spun with 12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many 
thousand needles at once." The number of tools that a machine 
can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first emanci- 
pated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of a handi- 
craftsman. 

In many manual implements the distinction between man as 
mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator prop- 
erly so called, is brought into striking contrast. For instance, 
the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while 
the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing and twisting, 
performs the real operation of spinning. It is this last part of the 
handicraftsman's implement that is first seized upon by the indus- 
trial revolution, leaving to the workman, in addition to his new 
labour of watching the machine with his eyes and correcting its 
mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical part of being the 
moving power. On the other hand, implements, in regard to which 
man has always acted as a simple motive power, as, for instance, 



1 It is only during the last 15 years (i.e., since about 1850), that a 
constantly increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in 
England by machinery, and that not by the same manufacturers who make 
the machines. Instances of machines for the fabrication of these mechanical 
tools are, the automatic bobbin-making engine, the card-setting engine, 
shuttle-making machines, and machines for forging mule and throstle 
spindles, 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 375 

by turning the crank of a mill, 1 by pumping, by moving up and down 
the arm of a bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &amp;c, such 
implements soon call for the application of animals, water, 2 and 
wind as motive powers. Here and there, long before the period of 
manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, these 
implements pass over into machines, but without creating any 
revolution in the mode of production. It becomes evident, in the 
period of Modern Industry, that these implements, even under 
their form of manual tools, are already machines. For instance, 
the pumps with which the Dutch, in 1836-7, emptied the Lake of 
Harlem, were constructed on the principle of ordinary pumps; 
the only difference being, that their pistons were driven by Cy- 
clopean steam-engines, instead of by men. The common and very 
imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally 
converted into a blowing-engine, by cdnne ting its arm with a steam- 
engine. The steam-engine itself, such as it wa« at its invention, 
during the manufacturing period at the close of the 17th century, 
and such as it continued to be down to 1780, a did not give rise to 
any industrial revolution. It was, on the contrary, the invention of 
machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines 
necessary. As soon as man, instead of working with an implement 
on the subject of his labour, becomes merely the motive power of 
an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that motive power 
takes the disguise of human muscle; and it may equally well 
take the form of wind, water or steam. Of course, this does not 
prevent such a change of form from producing great technical 
alterations in the mechanism that was originally constructed to be 



1 Moses says: "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads the corn." 
The Christian philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fastened a wooden 
board round, the necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power 
for grinding, in order to prevent them from putting flour into their mouths 
with their hands. 

2 It was partly the want of streams with a good fall on them, and partly 
their battles with superabundance of water in other respects, that compelled 
the Dutch to resort to wind as a motive power. The wind-mill itself they got 
from Germany, where its invention was the origin of a pretty squabble be- 
tween the nobles, the priests, and the emperor, as to which of those three the 
wind "belonged." The air makes bondage, was the cry in Germany, at the 
same time that the wind was making Holland free. What it reduced to bond- 
age in this case, was not the Dutchman, but the land for the Dutchman. 
In 1836, 12,000 wind-mills of 6,000 horse-power were still employed in Hol- 
land, to prevent two-thirds of the land from being reconverted into morasses. 

3 It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single 
acting engine; but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for rais- 
ing water, and the liquor from salt mines. 



376 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

driven by man alone. Now-a-days, all machines that have their 
way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, 
&amp;c, are, unless from their very nature their use on a small scale 
is excluded, constructed to be driven both by human and by 
purely mechanical motive power. 

The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial 
revolution, supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, 
by a mechanism operating with a number of similar tools, and 
set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of 
that power may be. 1 Here we have the machine, but only as an 
elementary factor of production by machinery. 

Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its 
working tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; 
and this mechanism requires, in order to overcome its resistance, 
a mightier moving power than that of man, apart from the fact 
that man is a very imperfect instrument for producing uniform 
continued motion. But assuming that he is acting simply as a 
motor, that a machine has taken the place of his tool, it is evident 
that he can be replaced by natural forces. Of all the great motors 
handed down from the manufacturing period, horse-power is the 
worst, partly because a horse has a head of his own, partly be- 
cause he is costly, and the extent to which he is applicable in 
factories is very restricted. 2 Nevertheless the horse was extensive- 



1 "The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single 
motor, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. c.) 

2 In January, 1861, John C. Morton read before the Society of Arts 
a paper on "The forces employed in agriculture." He there states: "Every 
improvement that furthers the uniformity of the land makes the steam- 
engine more and more applicable to the production of pure mechanical 
force... Horse-power is requisite wherever crooked fences and other obstruc- 
tions prevent' uniform action. These obstructions are vanishing day by day. 
For operations that demand more exercise of will than actual force, the only 
power applicable is that controlled every instant by the human mind — 
in other words, man-power." Mr. Morton then reduces steam-power, horse- 
power, and man-power, to the unit in general use for steam-engines, namely, 
the force required to raise 33,000 lbs. one foot in one minute, and reckons 
the cost of one horse-power from a steam-engine to be 3d., and from a horse 
to be 5J/ 2 d. per hour. Further, if a horse must fully maintain its health, it 
can work no more than 8 hours a day. Three at the least out of every seven 
horses used on tillage land during the year can be dispensed with by using 
steam-power, at an expense not greater than that which, the horses dispensed 
with, would cost during the 3 or 4 months in which alone they can be used 
effectively. Lastly, steam-power, in those agricultural operations in which 
it can be employed improves, in comparison with horse-power, the quality 
of the work. To do the work of a steam-engine would require 66 men, at a 
total cost of 15s. an hour, and to do the work of a horse, 32 men, at a 
total cost of 8s. an hour. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 377 

ly used during the infancy of Modern Industry. This is proved, 
as well by the complaints of contemporary agriculturists, as by 
the term "horse-power," which has survived to this day as an 
expression for mechanical force. 

Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in 
England, the birthplace of Modern Industry, the use of water- 
power preponderated even during the manufacturing period. 
In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn two 
pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel. But the increased 
size of the gearing was too much for the water-power, which had 
now become insufficient, and this was one of the circumstances 
that led to a more accurate investigation of the laws of friction. 
In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power in 
mills that were put in motion by pushing and pulling a lever, 
led to the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which 
afterwards plays so important a part in Modern Industry. 1 In 
this way, during the manufacturing period, were developed the 
first scientific and technical elements of Modern Mechanical 
Industry. Arkwright's throstle-spinning mill was from the very 
first turned by water. But for all that, the use of water, as the 
predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties. It could 
not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, 
and, above all, it was essentially local.* Not till the invention 
of Watt's second and so-called double-acting steam-engine, 
was a prime mover found, that begot its own force by the consump- 
tion of coal and water, whose power was entirely under man's 
control, that was mobile and a means of locomotion, that was 
urban and not, like the water-wheel, rural, that permitted pro- 
duction to be concentrated in towns instead of, like the water- 
wheels, being scattered up and down the country, 3 that was 
of universal technical application, and, relatively speaking, 



1 Faulhaber, 1625; De Caus, 1688. 

2 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power 
from many of its former fetters. 

* "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory 
depended upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn a 
water-wheel; and, although the establishment of the water-mills was the com- 
mencement of the breaking up of the domestic system of manufacture, yet 
the mills necessarily situated upon streams, and frequently at consider- 
able distances the one from the other, formed part of a rural, rather than 
an urban system; and it was not until the introduction of the steam-power 
as a substitute for the stream that factories were congregated in towns, and 
localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were 
found in sufficient quantities. The steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing 
owns." (A. Redgrave in "Reports of the Insp.of Fact., 30th April, I860," p. 36.) 



378 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

little affected in its choice of residence by local circumstances. 
The greatness of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification 
of the patent that he took out in April, 1784. In that specification 
his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific 
purpose, but as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical 
Industry. In it he points out applications, many of which, as 
for instance, the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half 
a century later. Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines 
in navigation. His successors, Boultonand Watt, sent to the exhi- 
bition of 1851 steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers. 

As soon as tools had been converted from being manual im- 
plements of man into implements of a mechanical apparatus, 
of a machine, the motive mechanism also acquired an independent 
form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human strength. 
Thereupon the individual machine, that we have hitherto been 
considering, sinks into a mere factor in production by machinery. 
One motive mechanism was now able to drive many machines at 
once. The motive mechanism grows with the number of the 
machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting 
mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus. 

We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number 
of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery. 

In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single ma- 
chine, which performs all the various operations previously done 
by one handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by a weav- 
er with his loom; or by several handicraftsmen successively, 
either separately or as members of a system of Manufacture. x 
For example, in the manufacture of envelopes, one man folded 
the paper with the folder, another laid on the gum, a third turned 
the flap over, on which the device is impressed, a fourth em- 
bossed the device, and so on; and for each of these operations 
the envelope had to change hands. One single envelope machine 
now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than 
3,000 envelopes in an hour. In the London exhibition of 1862, 



1 From the standpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving 
was not simple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and con- 
sequently the power-loom is a machine that does very complicated work. 
It is altogether erroneous to suppose that modern machinery originally 
appropriated those operations alone, which division of labour had simpli- 
fied. Spinning and weaving were, during the manufacturing period, split 
up into new species, and the implements were modified and improved; but 
the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its handicraft 
character. It is not the labour, but the instrument of labour, that serves as 
the starting-point of the machine. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 379 

there was an American machine for making paper cornets. It 
cut the paper, pasted, folded, and finished 300 in a minute. 
Here, the whole process, which, when carried on as Manufacture, 
was split up into, and carried out by, a series of operations, is 
completed by a single machine, working a combination of va- 
rious tools. Now, whether such a machine be merely a reproduc- 
tion of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of 
various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either 
case, in the factory, i.e., in the workshop in which machin- 
ery alone is used, we meet again with simple co-operation; 
and, leaving the workman out of consideration for the moment, 
this cp-operation presents itself to us, in the first instance, as the 
conglomeration in one place of similar and simultaneously acting 
machines. Thus, a weaving factory is constituted of a number of 
power-looms, working side by side, and a sewing factory of a 
number of sewing-machines all in the same building. But there 
is here a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all the 
machines receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal 
degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, by the 
intermediary of the transmitting mechanism; and this mecha- 
nism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, since only 
particular ramifications of it branch off to each machine. 
Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, 
so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of 
the motive mechanism. 

A real machinery system, however, does not take the place 
of these independent machines, until the subject of labour goes 
through a connected series of detail processes, that are carried 
out by a chain of machines of various kinds, the one supple- 
menting the other. Here we have again the co-operation by di- 
vision of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, it is 
a combination of detail machines. The special tools of the various 
detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, combers, spinners, 
&amp;c, in the woollen manufacture, are now transformed into the 
tools of specialised machines, each machine constituting a special 
organ, with a special function, in the system. In those branches 
of industry in which the machinery system is first introduced, 
Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural 
basis for the division, and consequent organisation, of the process 
of production. 1 Nevertheless an essential difference at once 

1 Before the epoch of Mechanical Industry, the wool manufacture was 
the predominating manufacture in England. Hence it was in this industry 
that, in the first half of the 18th century, the most experiments were 



380 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

manifests itself. In Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their 
manual implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each 
particular detail process. If, on the one hand, the workman be- 
comes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was pre- 
viously made suitable to the workman. This subjective principle 
of the division of labour no longer exists in production by machin- 
ery. Here, the process as a whole is examined objectively, in 
itself, that is to say, without regard to the question of its execu- 
tion by human hands, it is analysed into its constituent phases; 
and the problem, how to execute each detail process, and bind 
them all into a whole, is solved by the aid of machines, chemistry, 
&amp;C 1 But, of course, in this case also, theory must be perfected by 
accumulated experience on a large scale. Each detail machine 
supplies raw material to the machine next in order; and since they 
are all working at the same time, the product is always going 
through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly 
in a state of transition, from one phase to another. Just as in Man- 
ufacture, the direct co-operation of the detail labourers estab- 
lishes a numerical proportion between the special groups, so in an 
organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is con- 
stantly kept employed by another, a fixed relation is established 
between their numbers, their size, and their speed. The collective 
machine, now an organised system of various kinds of single 
machines, and of groups of single machines, becomes more and 
more perfect, the more the process as a whole becomes a continuous 
one, i.e., the less the raw material is interrupted in its passage 
from its first phase to its last; in other words, the more its passage 

made. Cotton, which required less careful preparation for its treatment by 
machinery, derived the benefit of the experience gained on wool, just as after- 
wards the manipulation of wool by machinery was developed on the lines of 
cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery.lt was only during the 10 years im- 
mediately preceding 1866, that isolated details of the wool manufacture, such 
as wool-combing, were incorporated in the factory system. "The application 
of power to the process of combing wool ... extensively in operation since 
the introduction of the combing-machine, especially Lister's ... undoubtedly 
had the effect of throwing a very large number of men out of work. Wool 
was formerly combed by hand, most frequently in the cottage of the comber. 
It is now very generally combed in the factory, and hand-labour is supersed- 
ed, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool 
is still preferred. Many of the hand-combers found employment in the facto- 
ries, but the produce of the hand-combers bears so small a proportion to 
that of the machine, that the employment of a very large number of combers 
has passed away." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact for 31st Oct., 1856," p. 16.) 

1 "The principle of the factory system, then, is to substitute ... the par- 
tition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division or gradua- 
tion of labour among artisans." (Andrew Ure: "The Philosophy of Manufac- 
tures," Lond., 1835, p. 20.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 381 

from one phase to another is effected, not by the hand of man, but 
by the machinery itself. In Manufacture the isolation of each de- 
tail process is a condition imposed by the nature of division of 
labour, but in the fully developed factory the continuity of thoso 
processes is, on the contrary, imperative. 

A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co- 
operation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination 
of different machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a huge 
automaton, whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. 
But although the factory as a whole be driven by its steam-engine, 
yet either some of the individual machines may require the aid 
of the workman for some of their movements (such aid was nec- 
essary for the running in of the mule carriage, before the inven- 
tion of the self-acting mule, and is still necessary in fine-spinning 
mills); or, to enable a machine to do its work, certain parts of 
it may require to be handled by the workman like a manual tool; 
this was the case in machine-makers' workshops, before the con- 
version of the slide rest into a self-actor. As soon as a machine 
executes, without man's help, all the movements requisite to elab- 
orate the raw material, needing only attendance frcm him, we 
have an automatic system of machinery, and one that is suscep- 
tible of constant improvement in its details. Such improvements 
as the apparatus that stops a drawing frame, whenever a sliver 
breaks, and the self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so 
soon as the shuttle bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern 
inventions. As an example, both of continuity of production, and 
of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a 
modern paper mill. In the paper industry generally, we may 
advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions between 
modes of production based on different means of production, but 
also the connexion of the social conditions of production with 
those modes: for the old German paper-making furnishes us with 
a sample of handicraft production; that of Holland in the 17th 
and of France in the 18th century with a sample of manufacturing 
in the strict sense; and that of modern England with a sample of 
automatic fabrication of this article. Besides these, there still 
exist, in India and China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the 
same industry. 

An organised system of machines, to which motion is com- 
municated by the transmitting mechanism from a central auto- 
maton, is the most developed form of production by machinery. 
Here we have, in the place of the isolated machine, a mechanical 
monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose demon power, 



382 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his giant 
limbs, at length breaks out into the fast and furious whirl of his 
countless working organs. 

There were mules and steam-engines before there were any 
labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules 
and steam-engines; just as men wore clothes before there were 
such people as tailors. The inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, 
Watt, and others, were, however, practicable, only because those 
inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable number of skilled 
mechanical workmen, placed at their disposal by the manufac- 
turing period. Some of these workmen were independent handi- 
craftsmen of various trades, others were grouped together in manu- 
factures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of labour was 
strictly carried out. As inventions increased in number, and the 
demand for the newly discovered machines grew larger, the ma- 
chine-making industry split up, more and more, into numerous 
independent branches, and division of labour in these manufac- 
tures was more and more developed. Here, then, we see in Man- 
ufacture the immediate technical foundation of Modern Industry. 
Manufacture produced the machinery, by means of which Modern 
Industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems 
in those spheres of production that it first seized upon. The factory 
system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on 
an inadequate foundation. When the system attained to a certain 
degree of development, it had to root up this ready-made foun- 
dation, which in the meantime had been elaborated on the old 
lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should correspond to its 
methods of production. Just as the individual machine retains 
a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked by the power of man 
alone, and just as no system of machinery could be properly 
developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier 
motive powers, animals, wind, and even water; so, too, Modern 
Industry was crippled in its complete development, so long as 
its characteristic instrument of production, the machine, owed its 
existence to personal strength and personal skill, and depended on 
the muscular development, the keenness of sight, and the cunning 
of hand, with which the detail workmen in manufactures, and the 
manual labourers in handicrafts, wielded their dwarfish imple- 
ments. Thus, apart from the dearness of the machines made in 
this way, a circumstance that is ever present to the mind of the 
capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means of 
machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of 
production, were dependent on the growth of a class of workmen, 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 383 

who, owing to the almost artistic nature of their employment, 
could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps 
and bounds. But besides this, at a certain stage of its development, 
Modern Industry became technologically incompatible with the 
basis furnished for it by handicraft and Manufacture. The in- 
creasing size of the prime movers, of the transmitting mechanism, 
and of the machines proper, the greater complication, multifor- 
mity and regularity of the details of these machines, as they more 
and more departed from the model of those originally made by 
manual labour, and acquired a form, untrammelled except by the 
conditions under which they worked, 1 the perfecting of the auto- 
matic system, and the use, every day more unavoidable, of a more 
refractory material, such as iron instead of wood— the solution 
of all these problems, which sprang up by the force of circum- 
stances, everywhere met with a stumbling-block in the personal 
restrictions, which even the collective labourer of Manufacture 
could not break through, except to a limited extent. Such ma- 
chines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and 
the modern carding engine, could never have been furnished by 
Manufacture. 

A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of 
industry involves a similar change in other spheres. This hap- 
pens at first in such branches of industry as are connected together 
by being separate phases of a process, and yet are isolated by the 
social division of labour, in such a way, that each of them pro- 
duces an independent commodity. Thus spinning by machin- 
ery made weaving by machinery a necessity, and both togeth- 
er made the mechanical and chemical revolution that took 
place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, imperative. So too r 
on the other hand, the revolution in cotton-spinning called 
forth the invention of the gin, for separating the seeds from 



1 The power-loom was at first made chiefly of wood; in its improved mod- 
ern form it is made of iron. To what an extent the old forms of the instru- 
ments of production influenced their new forms at first starting, is shown by, 
amongst other things, the most superficial comparison of the present power- 
loom with the old one, of the modern blowing apparatus of a blast-furnace 
with the first inefficient mechanical reproduction of the ordinary bellows, 
and perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by the attempts before 
the invention of the present locomotive, to construct a locomotive that actu- 
ally had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, it raised alternately 
from the ground. It is only after considerable development of the science of 
mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a machine 
becomes settled entirely in accordance with mechanical principles, and 
emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it. 



384 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this invention, that 
the production of cotton became possible on the enormous 
scale at present required. 1 But more especially, the revolution 
in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made 
necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social 
process of production, i.e., in the means of communication 
and of transport. In a society whose pivot, to use an expression 
of Fourier, was agriculture on a small scale, with its subsidiary 
domestic industries, and the urban handicrafts, the means of 
communication and transport were so utterly inadequate to the 
productive requirements of the manufacturing period, with 
its extended division of social labour, its concentration of the 
instruments of labour, and o£ the workmen, and its colonial 
markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. In the same 
way the means of communication and transport handed down 
from the manufacturing period soon became unbearable trammels 
on Modern Industry, with its feverish haste of production, its 
enormous extent, its constant flinging of capital and labour from 
one sphere of production into another, and its newly-created 
connexions with the markets of the whole world. Hence, apart 
from the radical changes introduced in the construction of sailing 
vessels, the means of communication and transport became grad- 
ually adapted to the modes of production of mechanical indus- 
try, by the creation of a system of river steamers, railways, ocean 
steamers, and telegraphs. But the huge masses of iron that had 
now to be forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be bored, and to be 
shaped, demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the 
construction of which the methods of the manufacturing period 
were utterly inadequate. 

Modern Industry had therefore itself to take in hand the 
machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to 
construct machines by machines. It was not till it did this, that 
it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and stood 
on its own feet. Machinery, simultaneously with the increasing 
use of it, in the first decades of this century, appropriated, by 
degrees, the fabrication of machines proper. But it was only 
during the decade preceding 1866, that the construction of rail- 
ways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale called into exist- 



1 Eli Whitney's cotton gin had until very recent times undergone less 
essential changes than any other machine of the 18th century. It is only dur- 
ing the last decade (i.e., since 1856) that another American, Mr. Emery, 
of Albany, New York, has rendered Whitney's gin antiquated by an im- 
provement as simple as it is effective. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 355 

ence the cyclopean machines now employed in the construction 
of prime movers. 

The most essential condition to the production of machines 
by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount 
of force, and yet under perfect control. Such a condition was al- 
ready supplied by the steam-engine. But at the same time it 
was necessary to produce the geometrically accurate straight 
lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, required in the 
detail parts of the machines. This problem Henry Maudsley solved 
in the first decade of this century by the invention of the slide 
rest, a tool that was soon made automatic, and in a modified form 
was applied to other constructive machines besides the lathe, for 
which it was originally intended. This mechanical appliance 
replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand itself, which 
produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool 
along the iron or other material operated upon. Thus it became 
possible to produce the forms of the individual parts of machinery 
"with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated 
experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give." 1 

If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery 
employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes 
the operating tool, we find the manual implements re-appearing, 
but on a cyclopean scale. The operating part of the boring machine 
is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; without this ma- 
chine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and 
of hydraulic presses could not be made. The mechanical lathe 
is only a cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary foot-lathe; the 
planing machine, an iron carpenter, that works on iron with the 
same tools that the human carpenter employs on wood; the instru- 
ment that, on the London wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic 
razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily 
as a tailor's scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the 
steam-hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, but of 
such a weight that not Thor himself could wield it. 2 These steam- 



1 "The Industry of Nations," Lond., 1855, Part II., p. 239. This work 
also remarks: "Simple and outwardly unimportant as this appendage to lathes 
may appear, it is not, we believe, averring too much to state, that its influ- 
ence in improving and extending the use of machinery has been as great as 
that produced by Watt's improvements of the steam-engine itself. Its intro- 
duction went at once to perfect all machinery, to cheapen it, and to stimulate 
invention and improvement." 

2 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in Lon- 
don, is called "Thor." It forges a shaft of 16y 2 tons with as much ease as a 
blacksmith forges a horse-shoe. 



386 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



hammers are an invention of Nasmyth, and there is one that 
weighs over 6 tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on 
an anvil weighing 36 tons. It is mere child's-play for it to crush 
a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less capable of driving, 
with a succession of light taps, a nail into a piece of soft wood. l 
The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessi- 
tate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and the 
conscious application of science, instead of rule of thumb. 
In Manufacture, the organisation of the social labour-process is 
purely subjective; it is a combination of detail labourers; in its 
machinery system, Modern Industry has a productive organism 
that is purely objective, in which the labourer becomes a mere 
appendage to an already existing material condition of produc- 
tion. In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on di- 
vision of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the collec- 
tive, workman still appears to be more or less accidental. 
Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, oper- 
ates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. 
Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in 
the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument 
of labour itself. 

SECTION 2.— THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY MACHINERY TO 

THE PRODUCT 

We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-opera- 
tion and division of labour cost capital nothing. They are natu- 
ral forces of social labour. So also physical forces, like steam, 
water, &amp;c, when appropriated to productive processes, cost 
nothing. But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, so he 
requires something that is work of man's hand, in order to con- 
sume physical forces productively. A water-wheel is necessary 
to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the 
elasticity of steam. Once discovered, the law of the deviation of 
the magnetic needle in the field of an electric current, or the 
law of the magnetisation of iron, around which an electric current 
circulates, cost never a penny. 2 But the exploitation of these laws 



1 Wood-working machines that are also capable of being employed on 
a small scale are mostly American inventions. 

2 Science, generally speaking, costs the capitalist nothing, a fact that 
by no means hinders him from exploiting it. The science of others is as much 
annexed by capital as the labour of others. Capitalistic appropriation and 
personal appropriation, whether of science or of material wealth, are, however, 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 387 

for the purposes of telegraphy, &amp;c, necessitates a costly and ex- 
tensive apparatus. The tool, as we have seen, is not extermi- 
nated by the machine. From being a dwarf implement of the 
human organism, it expands and multiplies into the imple- 
ment of a mechanism created by man. Capital now sets the la- 
bourer to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine 
which itself handles the tools. Although, therefore, it is clear at 
the first glance that, by incorporating both stupendous physical 
forces, and the natural sciences, with the process of production, 
Modern Industry raises the productiveness of labour to an extraor- 
dinary degree, it is by no means equally clear, that this increased 
productive force is not, on the other hand, purchased by an increased 
expenditure of labour. Machinery, like every other component 
of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own 
value to the product that it serves to beget. In so far as the machine 
has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, 
it forms an element in the value of that product. Instead of being 
cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value 
of the machine. And it is clear as noon-day, that machines and 
systems of machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour 
of Modern Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value 
than the implements used in handicrafts and manufactures. 

In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, 
while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters 
into the value-begetting process only by bits. It never adds more 
value than it loses, on an average, by wear and tear. Hence there 
is a great difference between the value of a machine, and the value 
transferred in a given time by that machine to the product. The 
longer the life of the machine in the labour-process, the greater is 
that difference. It is true, no doubt, as we have already seen, that 
every instrument of labour enters as a whole into the labour-proc- 
ess, and only piece-meal, proportionally to its average daily loss 
by wear and tear, into the value-begetting process. But this 
difference between the instrument as a whole and its daily wear 
and tear, is much greater in a machine than in a tool, because the 
machine, being made from more durable material, has a longer 
life; because its employment, being regulated by strictly scien- 
tific laws, allows of greater economy in the wear and tear of its 
parts, and in the materials it consumes; and lastly, because its 



totally different things. Dr. Ure himself deplores the gross ignorance of 
mechanical science existing among his dear machinery-exploiting manu- 
facturers, and Liebig can a tale unfold about the astounding ignorance of 
chemistry displayed by English chemical manufacturers. 



388 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



field of production is incomparably larger than that of a tool. 
After making allowance, both in the case of the machine and of the 
tool, for their average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit 
to the product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their 
consumption of auxiliary substances, such as oil, coal, and so 
on, they each do their work gratuitously, just like the forces fur- 
nished by Nature without the help of man.The greater the produc- 
tive power of the machinery compared with that of the tool, the 
greater is the extent of its gratuitous service compared with that 
of the tool. In Modern Industry man succeeded for the first time 
in making the product of his past labour work on a large scale 
gratuitously, like the forces of Nature. * 

In treating of Co-operation and Manufacture, it was shown 
that certain general factors of production, such as buildings, 
are, in comparison with the scattered means of production of the 
isolated workman, economised by being consumed in common, 
and that they therefore make the product cheaper. In a system 
of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine consumed 
in common by its numerous operating implements, but the prime 
mover, together with a part of the transmitting mechanism, is 
consumed in common by the numerous operative machines. 

Given the difference between the value of the machinery, 
and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent 
to which this latter value makes the product dearer, depends in 
the first instance, upon the size of the product; so to say, upon its 
area. Mr. Baynes, of Blackburn, in a lecture published in 1858, 
estimates that "each real mechanical horse-power 2 will drive 450 



1 Ricardo lays such stress on this effect of machinery (of which, in 
other connexions, he takes no more notice than he does of the general distinc- 
tion between the labour process and the process of creating surplus-value), 
that he occasionally loses sight of the value given up by machines to the prod- 
uct, and puts machines on the same looting as natural forces. Thus "Adam 
Smith nowhere undervalues the services which the natural agents and machin- 
ery perform for us, but he very justly distinguishes the nature of the value 
which they add to commodities ..as they perform their work gratuitously, 
the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value in exchange." 
(Ric, 1. c, pp. 336, 337.) This observation of Ricardo is ol course correct in so 
far as it is directed against J. B. Say, who imagines that machines render 
the "service" of creating value which forms a part ol "profits." 

2 A horse power is equal to a force of 33,000 loot pounds per minute, 
i.e., to a force that raises 33,000 pounds one foot in a minute or one pound 
33,000 feet. This is the horse-power meant in the text In ordinary language, 
and also here and there in quotations in this work, a distinction is drawn 
between the "nominal" and the "commercial" or "indicated" horse-power 
of the same engine The old or nominal horse power is calculated exclusively 
from the length of piston-stroke, and the diameter of the cylinder, and 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 339 

self-acting mule spindles, with preparation, or 200 throstle spin- 
dles, or 15 looms for 40 inch cloth with the appliances for warping, 
sizing, &amp;c." In the first case.it is the day's produce of 450 mule 
spindles, in the second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 
15 power-looms, over which the daily cost of one horse-power, and 
the wear and tear of the machinery set in motion by that power, 
are spread; so that only a very minute value is transferred by 
such wear and tear to a pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. The 
same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned above. Since- 
its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &amp;c, are spread over 
the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only 
a small value is added to a hundred weight of iron; but that value 
would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument were employed 
in driving in nails. 

Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of 
its operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their mass, 
the amount of its product will depend on the velocity of its work- 
ing parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the num- 
ber of blows given by the hammer in a minute. Many of these 
colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder's 
patent machine for forging spindles with small hammers gives 
as many as 700 strokes per minute. 

Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the 
product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total 
value of the machinery. l The less labour it contains, the less value 



leaves pressure of steam and piston speed out of consideration. It expresses 
practically this: This engine would be one of 50 horse-power, if it were driv- 
en with the same low pressure of steam, and the same slow piston speed, 
as in the days of Boulton and Watt. But the two latter factors have increased 
enormously since those days. In order to measure the mechanical force exert- 
ed to-day by an engine, an indicator has been invented which shows the 
pressure of the steam in the cylinder. The piston speed is easily ascertained. 
Thus the "indicated" or "commercial" horse-power of an engine is expressed 
by a mathematical formula, involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, 
piston speed, and steam pressure, simultaneously, and showing what mul- 
tiple of 33,000 pounds is really raised by the engine in a minute. Hence, one 
"nominal" horse-power may exert three, four, or even five "indicated" or 
"real" horse-powers. This observation is made for the purpose of explaining 
various citations in the subsequent pages. — F E. 

1 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally 
miss here the "interest" that the machine, in proportion to its capital value, 
adds to the product. It is, however , easily seen that since a machine no more 
creates new value than any other part of constant capital, it cannot add 
any value under the name of "interest." It is also evident that here, where 
we are treating of the production of surplus-value, we cannot assume a priori 
the existence of any part of that value under the name of interest. The 



390 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



it imparts to the product. The less value it gives up, so much the 
more productive it is, and so much the more its services approxi- 
mate to those of natural forces. But the production of machinery 
by machinery lessens its value relatively to its extension and effi- 
cacy. 

An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities 
produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of 
the same commodities produced by machinery, shows generally, 
that, in the product of machinery, the value due to the instru- 
ments of labour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. 
In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, 
relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, 
for instance, increases. * 

It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce 
a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, there 
is nothing but a transposition of labour; consequently the total 
labour required to produce a commodity is not lessened or the 
productiveness of labour is not increased. It is clear, however, 
that the difference between the labour a machine costs, and the 



capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, primd facie, absurd, and repug- 
nant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third book 
of this work. 

1 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases 
both absolutely and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses 
and other animals that are employed as mere moving forces, and not as ma- 
chines for changing the form of matter. It may here be incidentally observed, 
that Descartes, in defining animals as mere machines, saw with eyes of the 
manufacturing period, while to eyes of the middle ages, animals were assist- 
ants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his "Restauration der 
Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon, anticipated an altera- 
tion in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by 
Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought, is plain from his "Dis- 
cours de la Methode." He there says: "II est possible (by the meth- 
ods he introduced in philosophy) de parvenir a des connaissances fort utiles 
a la vie, et qu'au lieu de cette philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les 
ecoles, on en peut trouver une pratique, par laquelle, connaissant la force et 
les actions du feu, de l'eau, de l'air,des astres, et de tous les autres corps qui 
nous environnent, aussi distinctement que nous connaissons les divers me- 
tiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrions employer en meme facon a tous les 
usages auxquels ils sont propres, et ainsi nous rendre comme maitres et pos- 
sesseurs de la nature" and thus "contribuer au perfectionnement de la vie 
humaine." In the preface to Sir Dudley North's "Discourses upon Trade" 
(1691) it is stated, that Descartes' method had begun to free Political Economy 
from the old fables and superstitious notions of gold, trade, &amp;c. On the whole, 
however, the early English economists sided with Bacon and Hobbes as their 
philosophers; while, at a later period, the philosopher xcu'e$oxV)v f Political 
Economy in England, France, and Italy, was Locke. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 391 

labour it saves, in other words, that the degree of its productive- 
ness does not depend on the difference between its own value and 
the value of the implement it replaces. As long as the labour spent 
on a machine, and consequently the portion of its value added to 
the product, remains smaller than the value added by the workman 
to the product with his tool, there is always a difference of labour 
saved in favour of the machine. The productiveness of a machine 
is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces. Ac- 
cording to Mr. Baynes, 2|- operatives are required for the 450 
mule spindles, inclusive of preparation machinery, x that are 
driven by one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, working 
ten hours, produces 13 ounces of yarn (average number of thick- 
ness); consequently 2-f- operatives spin weekly 365 f- lbs. of yarn. 
Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs. of cotton absorb, 
during their conversion into yarn, only 150 hours' labour, or 
fifteen days' labour of ten hours each. But with a spinning-wheel, 
supposing the hand-spinner to produce thirteen ounces of yarn in 
sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would absorb 2,700 days' 
labour of ten hours each, or 27,000 hours' labour. 2 Where block- 
printing, the old method of printing calico by hand, has been 
superseded by machine printing, a single machine prints, with 
the aid of one man or boy, as much calico of four colours in one 
hour, as it formerly took 200 men to do. 3 Before Eli Whitney 
invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from 
a pound of cotton cost an average day's labour. By means of his in- 
vention one negress was enabled to clean 100 lbs. daily; and since 
then, the efficacy of the gin has been considerably increased. A 
pound of cotton wool, previously costing 50 cents to produce, in- 
cluded after that invention more unpaid labour, and was conse- 
quently sold with greater profit, at 10 cents. In India they employ 



1 According to the annual report (1863) of the Essen chamber of com- 
merce, there was produced in 1862, at the cast-steel works of Krupp, with 
its 161 furnaces, thirty-two steam-engines (in the year 1800 this was about 
the number of all the steam-engines working in Manchester), and fourteen 
steam-hammers (representing in all 1,236 horse-power), forty-nine forges, 
203 tool-machines, and about 2,400 workmen— thirteen million pounds 
of cast steel. Here there are not two workmen to each horse-power. 

2 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 
117% to the value of the cotton. At the same period (1832) the total value 
added to the cotton by machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, 
amounted to about 33% of the value of the cotton. ("On the Economy of 
Machinery," pp. 165, 166.) 

3 Machine printing also economises colour. 



392 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, 
half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can 
clean 28 lbs. daily. With the churka invented some years ago by 
Dr. Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs. daily. If oxen, 
steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as 
feeders are required. Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do 
as much work in a day as formerly 750 people did on an average. 1 

As already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one 
hour at a cost of threepence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. 
I return to this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. 
The 15 shillings are by no means the expression in money of all 
the labour expended in one hour by the 66 men. If the ratio of 
surplus-labour to necessary labour were 100%, these 66 men would 
produce in one hour a value of 30 shillings, although their wages, 
15 shillings, represent only their labour for half an hour. Suppose, 
then, a machine cost as much as the wages for a year of the 150 
men it displaces, say £3,000; this £3,000 is by no means the expres- 
sion in money of the labour added to the object produced by these 
150 men before the introduction of the machine, but only of that 
portion of their year's labour which was expended for themselves 
and represented by their wages. On the other hand, the £3,000, 
the money-value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended 
on its production, no matter in what proportion this labour con- 
stitutes wages for the workman, and surplus-value for the capital- 
ist. Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the labour-power 
displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it is even then 
much less than the living labour it replaces. 2 

The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapen- 
ing the product, is limited in this way, that less labour must 
be expended in producing the machinery than is displaced by 
the employment of that machinery. For the capitalist, however, 
this use is still more limited. Instead of paying for the labour, he 
only pays the value of the labour-power employed; therefore, the 
limit to his using a machine is fixed by the difference between the 
value of the machine and the value of the labour-power replaced by 
it. Since the division of the day's work into necessary and surplus- 
labour differs in different countries, and even in the same country 
at different periods, or in different branches -of industry; and 



1 See Paper read by Dr. Watson, Reporter on Products to the Govern- 
ment of India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1860. 

2 "These mute agents (machines) are always the produce of much less 
labour than that which they displace, even when they are of the same money- 
value." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 40.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 393 

further, since the actual wage of the labourer at one time sinks 
below the value of his labour-power, at another rises above it, it 
is possible for the difference between the price of the machinery 
and the price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to 
vary very much, although the difference between the quantity of 
labour requisite to produce the machine and the total quantity 
replaced by it, remain constant. * But it is the former difference 
alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of producing a 
commodity, and, through the pressure of competition, influences 
his action. Hence the invention now-a-days of machines in Eng- 
land that are employed only in North America; just as in the six- 
teenth and seventeenth centuries, machines were invented in Ger- 
many to be used only in Holland, and just as many a French 
invention of the eighteenth century was exploited in England 
alone. In the older countries, machinery, when employed in some 
branches of industry, creates such a redundancy of labour in other 
branches that in these latter the fall of wages below the value of 
labour-power impedes the use of machinery, and, from the stand- 
point of the capitalist, whose profit comes, not from a diminution 
of the labour employed, but of the labour paid for, renders that 
use superfluous and often impossible. In some branches of the 
woollen manufacture in England the employment of children has 
during recent years been considerably diminished, and in some 
cases has been entirely abolished. Why? Because the Factory Acts 
made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the 
other four, or each working five hours. But the parents refused 
to sell the "half-timers" cheaper than the "full-timers." .Hence 
the substitution of machinery for the "half-timers." 2 Before the 
labour of women and of children under 10 years of age was forbid- 
den in mines, capitalists considered the employment of naked 
women and girls, often in company with men, so far sanctioned by 



1 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope 
for the employment of machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society. 

2 "Employers of labour would not unnecessarily retain two sets of 
children under thirteen.... In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners 
of woollen yarn, now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., 
half-timers. They have introduced improved and new machinery of various 
kinds, which altogether supersedes the employment of children {i.e., under 
13 years); f. i., I will mention one process as an illustration of this diminution 
in the number of children, wherein by the addition of an apparatus, called 
a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of six or four half-timers, 
according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by one young 
person (over 13 years) ...the half-time system 'stimulated' the invention 
of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858.) 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



their moral code, and especially by their ledgers, that it was only 
after the passing of the Act that they had recourse to machinery. 
The Yankees have invented a stone-breaking machine. The English 
do not make use of it, because the "wretch" 1 who does this work 
gets paid for such a small portion of his labour, that machinery 
would increase the cost of production to the capitalist. 2 In 
England women are still occasionally used instead of horses for 
hauling canal boats, 3 because the labour required to produce horses 
and machines is an accurately known quantity, while that required 
to maintain the women of the surplus-population is below all 
calculation. Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squander- 
ing of human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than 
in England, the land of machinery. 

SECTION 3.— THE PROXIMATE EFFECTS 
OF MACHINERY ON THE WORKMAN 

The starting-point of Modern Industry is, as we have shown, 
the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution 
attains its most highly developed form in the organised system of 
machinery in a factory. Before we inquire how human material 
is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider some 
general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself. 

a. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-power 
by Capital. The Employment of Women and Children 

In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it 
becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular 
strength, and those whose bodily development is incomplete, 
but whose limbs are all the more supple. The labour of women 
and children was, therefore, the first thing sought for by capital- 
ists who used machinery. That mighty substitute for labour and 
labourers was forthwith changed into a means for increasing the 
number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the direct sway of 
capital, every member of the workman's family, without distinc- 
tion of age or sex. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the 



1 "Wretch" is the recognised term in English Political Economy for the 
agricultural labourer. 

2 "Machinery ...can frequently not be employed until labour (he means 
wages) rises." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479.) 

a See "Report of the Social Science Congress, at Edinburgh." Oct., 1863. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 395 

place, not only of the children's play, but also of free labour at 
home within moderate limits for the support of the family. 1 

The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the 
labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, 
but also by that necessary to maintain his family. Machinery, 
by throwing every member of that family on to the labour-market, 
spreads the value of the man's labour-power over his whole family. 
It thus depreciates his labour-power. To purchase the labour- 
power of a family of four workers may, perhaps, cost more than 
it formerly did to purchase the labour-power of the head of the 
family, but, in return, four days' labour takes the place of one, and 
their price falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus-labour of 
four over the surplus-labour of one. In order that the family may 
live, four people must now, not only labour, but expend surplus- 
labour for the capitalist. Thus we see, that machinery, while 
augmenting the human material that forms the principal object 
of capital's exploiting power, 2 at the same time raises the degree 
of exploitation. 

1 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American 
Civil War, was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire, 
and other places, to report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. 
He reported, that from a hygienic point of view, and apart from the banish- 
ment of the operatives from the factory atmosphere, the crisis had several 
advantages. The women now had sufficient leisure to give their infants the 
breast, instead of poisoning them with "Godfrey's cordial." They had time 
to learn to cook. Unfortunately the acquisition of this art occurred at a time 
when they had nothing to cook. But from this we see how capital, for the 
purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the labour necessary in the home 
of the family. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the daughters 
of the workmen in sewing schools. An American revolution and a universal 
crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might 
learn to sew! 

2 "The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the 
growing substitution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult 
labour. Three girls of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, 
have replaced the one man of mature age, of wages varying from 18 shillings 
to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey: "The Logic of Political Econ.," Lon- 
don, 1844. Note top. 147.) Since certain family functions, such as nursing and 
suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the mothers confiscated by 
capital, must try substitutes of some sort. Domestic work, such as sewing and 
mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made articles. Hence, the 
diminished expenditure of labour in the house is accompanied by an increased 
expenditure of money. The cost of keeping the family increases, and balances 
the greater income. In addition to this, economy and judgment in the con- 
sumption and preparation of the means of subsistence becomes impossible. 
Abundant material relating to these facts, which are concealed by official 
Political Economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Facto- 
ries, of the Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the 
Reports on Public Health. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract be^ 
tween the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their 
mutual relations. Taking the exchange of commodities as our 
basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as 
free persons, as independent owners of commodities; the one pos- 
sessing money and means of production, the other labour-power. 
But now the capitalist buys children and young persons under 
age. Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he 
disposed of nominally as a free agent. Now he sells wife and child. 
He has become a slave-dealer. 1 The demand for children's labour 
often resembles in form the inquiries for negro slaves, such as were 
formerly to be read among the advertisements in American jour- 
nals. "My attention," says an English factory inspector, "was 
drawn to an advertisement in the local paper of one of the most 
important manufacturing towns of my district, of which the fol- 
lowing is a copy: Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger 
than what can pass for 13 years. Wages, 4 shillings a week. Apply 
&amp;c." 2 The phrase "what can pass for 13 years," has reference to 
the fact, that by the Factory Act, children under 13 years may 
work only 6 hours. A surgeon officially appointed must certify 
their age. The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look 
as if they were already 13 years old. The decrease, often by leaps 
and bounds in the number of children under 13 years employed 
in factories, a decrease that is shown in an astonishing manner 
by the English statistics of the last 20 years, was for the most 
part, according to the evidence of the factory inspectors them- 
selves, the work of the certifying surgeons, who overstated the 
age of the children, agreeably to the capitalist's greed for exploi- 

1 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the 
hours of labour of women and children in English factories was exacted 
from capital by the male operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Chil- 
dren's Employment Commission traits of the operative parents in relation to 
the traffic in children, that are truly revolting and thoroughly like slave- 
dealing. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may be seen from the same 
reports, denounces this brutality which he himself creates, perpetuates, and 
exploits, and which he moreover baptises "freedom of labour." "Infant labour 
has been called into aid... even to work for their own daily bread. With- 
out strength to endure such disproportionate toil, without instruction 
to guide their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically 
and morally polluted. The Jewish historian has remarked upon the overthrow 
of Jerusalem by Titus that it was no wonder it should have .been destroyed, 
with such a signal destruction, when an inhuman mother sacrificed her own 
offspring to satisfy the cravings of absolute hunger." ("Public Economy 
Concentrated." Carlisle, 1833, p. 66.) 

2 A. Redgrave in "Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1858/' 
pp. 40, 41. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 397 

tation, and the sordid trafficking needs of the parents. In the 
notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every 
Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 
9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufac- 
turers. "The usual terms are Is. 8d. a week (this belongs to the 
parents) and '2d. for myself and tea.' The contract is binding only 
for the week. The scene and language while this market is going 
on are quite disgraceful." 1 It has also occurred in England, that 
women have taken "children from the workhouse and let any 
one have them out for 2s. 6d. a week." 2 In spite of legislation, the 
number of boys sold in Great Britain by their parents to act as 
live chimney-sweeping machines (although there exist plenty of 
machines to replace them) exceeds 2,000. 3 The revolution effect- 
ed by machinery in the juridical relations between the buyer 
and the seller of labour-power, causing the transaction as a whole 
to lose the appearance of a contract between free persons, afforded 
the English Parliament an excuse, founded on juridical principles, 
for the interference of the state with factories. Whenever the law 
limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not before 
interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always 
renewed. They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw their 
children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to 
sell them where "freedom of labour" still rules, i.e., where chil- 
dren under 13 years are compelled to work like grown-up people, 
and therefore can be got rid of at a higher price. But since cap- 
ital is by nature a leveller, since it exacts in every sphere of 
production equality in the conditions of the exploitation of labour, 
the limitation by law of children's labour, in one branch of in- 
dustry, becomes the cause of its limitation in others. 

We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as 
well of the children and young persons as of the woman, whom 
machinery, first directly in the factories that shoot up on its 
basis, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of in- 
dustry, subjects to the exploitation of capital. In this place, there- 
fore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, dur- 
ing the first few years of their life, of the children of the oper- 
atives. In sixteen of the registration districts into which England 



1 "Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report," London, 1866, 
p. 81, n. 31. [Added in the 4th German edition. — TheBethnal Green silk 
industry is now almost destroyed — F E.\ 

2 "Children's Employment Commission, Third Report," London, 1864, 
p. 53, n. 15 

8 1. c, Fifth Report, p. 22, n. 137. 



398 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

is divided, there are, for every 100,000 children alive under the 
age of one year, only 9,000 deaths in a year on an average (iD 
one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths are over 10,000, 
but under 11,000, in 39 districts, over 11,000, but under 12,000; 
in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; in 22 districts over 
20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over 22,000; in 11 over 
23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, Ashton-under-Lyne, and Pres- 
ton, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport, and Bradford, over 
25,000; in Wisbeach, 26,000; and in Manchester, 26,125 l . As 
was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the 
high death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to 
the employment of the mothers away from their homes, and to 
the neglect and maltreatment, consequent on her absence, such 
as, amongst others, insufficient nourishment, unsuitable food, 
and dosing with opiates; besides this, there arises an unnatural 
estrangement between mother and child, and as a consequence 
intentional starving and poisoning of the children. 2 In those 
agricultural districts, "where a minimum in the employment 
of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low. " 3 
The Inquiry-Commission of 1861 led, however, to the unexpected 
result, that in some purely agricultural districts bordering on 
the North Sea, the death-rate of children under one year old 
almost equalled that of the worst factory districts. Dr. Julian 
Hunter was therefore commissioned to investigate this phenom- 
enon on the spot. His report is incorporated with the "Sixth 
Report on Public Health. " 4 Up to that time it was supposed, 
that the children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases 
peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. But the inquiry 
showed the very opposite, namely, that the same cause which 
drove away malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass 
in winter and a scanty pasture in summer, into fruitful corn land, 
created the exceptional death-rate of the infants. 5 The 70 medical 
men, whom Dr. Hunter examined in that district, were "won- 
derfully in accord" on this point. In fact, the revolution 

i "Sixth Report on Public Health," Lond., 1864, p. 34. 

2 "It (the inquiry of 1861) ... showed, moreover, that while, with the 
described circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and mismanage- 
ment which their mothers' occupations imply, the mothers become to a 
grievous extent denaturalised towards their offspring — commonly not trou- 
bling themselves much at the death, and even sometimes ... taking direct 
measures to insure it." (1. c.) 

■1. c, p. 454. 

4 1. c, pp. 454-463. "Report by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessivt 
mortality of infants in some rural districts of England." 

6 1. c, p. 35 and pp. 455, 456. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 



in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the indus- 
trial system. Married women, who work in gangs along with 
boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed at the 
disposal of the farmer, by a man called the "undertaker," who 
contracts for the whole gang. "These gangs will sometimes travel 
many miles from their own village; they are to be met morning 
and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with suit- 
able coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking wonder- 
fully strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immoral- 
ity and heedless of the fatal results which their love of this 
busy and independent life is bringing on their unfortunate off- 
spring who are pining at home." 1 Every phenomenon of the fac- 
tory districts is here reproduced, including, but to a greater 
extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing children with opi- 
ates. 2 "My knowledge of such evils," says Dr. Simon, the medical 
officer of the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on 
Public Health, "may excuse the profound misgiving with which 
I regard any large industrial employment of adult women." 3 "Hap- 
py indeed," exclaims Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, in his 
official report, "happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing 
districts of England, when every married woman having a family 
is prohibited from working in any textile works at all." 4 

The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploita- 
tion of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted 
by F. Engels in his "Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands," 
and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this 
place. But the intellectual desolation artificially produced by 
converting immature human beings into mere machines for the 
fabrication of surplus-value, a state of mind clearly distinguisha- 
ble from that natural ignorance which keeps the mind fallow with- 
out destroying its capacity for development, its natural fertility, 
this desolation finally compelled even the English Parliament to 
make elementary education a compulsory condition to the "pro- 



1 1. c, p. 456. 

2 In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption 
of opium among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is extending 
daily. "To push the sale of opiate ... is the great aim of some enterprising 
wholesale merchants. By druggists it is considered the leading article. " (1. c, 
p. 459.) Infants that take opiates "shrank up into little old men," or "wizened 
like little monkeys." (1. c, p. 460.) We here see how India and China 
avenged themselves on England. 

8 1. c, p. 37. 

4 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," p. 59. Mr. Baker was 
formerly a doctor. 



400 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



ductive" employment of children under 14 years, in every in* 
dustry subject to the Factory Acts. The spirit of capitalist produc- 
tion stands out clearly in the ludicrous wording of the so-called 
education clauses in the Factory Acts, in the absence of an admin- 
istrative machinery, an absence that again makes the compul- 
sion illusory, in the opposition of the manufacturers themselves 
to these education clauses, and in the tricks and dodges they put in 
practice for evading them. "For this the legislature is alone to 
blame, by having passed a delusive law, which, while it would 
seem to provide that the children employed in factories shall be 
educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end can 
be secured. It provides nothing more than that the children shall 
on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours 
(three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of a place 
called a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive 
weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by 
the subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress." 1 Previous to 
the passing of the amended Factory Act, 1844, it happened, not 
unfrequently, that the certificates of attendance at school were 
signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they 
themselves were unable to write. "On one occasion, on visiting 
a place called a school, from which certificates of school attendance 
had issued, I was so struck with the ignorance of the master, that 
I said to him: 'Pray, sir, can you read?' His reply was: 'Aye, sum- 
mat!' and as a justification of his right to grant certificates, 
he added: *At any rate, I am before my scholars.' The inspectors, 
when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail to represent 
the disgraceful state of the places called schools, certificates from 
which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with the laws, 
but they were successful only in obtaining thus much, that since 
the passing of the Act of 1844, the figures in the school certificate 
must be filled up in the handwriting of the schoolmaster, who 
must also sign his Christian and surname in full." 2 Sir John Kin- 
caid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates experiences of the same 
kind. "The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. Ann Killin. 
Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a mis- 
take, by beginning with the letter G, but correcting herself 
immediately, she said her name began with a K. On looking at 
her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I noticed 
that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no 



1 L. Horner in "Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 30th June, 1857," p. 17. 

2 L. Horner in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. 18, 19. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 401 

doubt as to her unfitness to teach. She herself also acknowledged 
that she could not keep the register... In a second school I 
found the schoolroom 15 feet long, and 10 feet wide, and counted 
in this space 75 children, who were gabbling something unintelli- 
gible." 1 "But it is not only in the miserable places above referred 
to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance with- 
out having received instruction of any value, for in many schools 
where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail 
from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3 
years old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, de- 
pending on the pence received from the greatest number of chil- 
dren whom it is possible to cram into the space. To this is to be add- 
ed scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other mate- 
rials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon the poor children 
themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere. I have been in many such 
6chools, where I have seen rows of children doing absolutely noth- 
ing; and this is certified as school attendance, and, in statistical 
returns, such children are set down as being educated." 2 In ScoU 
land the manufacturers try all they can to do without the chil- 
dren that are obliged to attend school. "It requires no further 
argument to prove that the educational clauses of the Factory 
Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners, tend in a 
great measure to exclude that class of children alike from the em- 
ployment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act." a 
Horribly grotesque does this appear in print works, which are 
regulated by a special Act. By that Act, "every child, before being 
employed in a print work must have attended school for at least 30 
days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immedi- 
ately preceding such first day of employment, and during the 
continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend 
for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every successive 
period of six months.... The attendance at school must be 

between 8 a. m. and 6 p. m. No attendance of less than 2y hours, 

nor more than 5 hours on any one day, shall be reckoned as part 
of the 150 hours. Under ordinary circumstances the children 
attend school morning and afternoon for 30 days, for at least 5 
hours each day, and upon the expiration of the 30 days, the 
statutory total of 150 hours having been attained, having, in their 



1 Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858/* 
pp.31. 32. 

2 L. Horner in "Reports, &amp;c, for 31st Oct., 1857," pp. 17, 18. 
• Sir J. Kincaid in "Reports, &amp;c, 31st Oct., 1856," p. 66. 



402 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



language, made up their book, they return to the print work, where 
they continue until the six months have expired, when another 
instalment of school attendance becomes due, and they again 
seek the school until the book is again made up. . . . Many boys 
having attended school for the required number of hours, 
when they return to school after the expiration of their six 
months' work in the print work, are in the same condition as when 
they first attended school as print-work boys, that they have lost 
all they gained by their previous school attendance. ... In 
other print works the children's attendance at school is made to 
depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establish- 
ment. The requisite number of hours is made up each six months, 
by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading 
over, perhaps, the whole six months. . . . For instance, the 
attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a. m., on another 
day from 1 p. m. to 4 p. m., and the child might not appear at 
school again for several days, when it would attend from 3 p. m. to 
6 p. m.; then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a 
week, then it would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, 
after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when the opera- 
tive who employed it chose to spare it; and thus the child was, as 
it were, buffeted from school to work, from work to school, until 
the tale of 150 hours was told." 1 

By the excessive addition of women and children to the ranks 
of the workers, machinery at last breaks down the resistance 
which the male operatives in the manufacturing period continued 
to oppose to the despotism of capital. 2 



1 A. Redgrave in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st. Oct., 1857," pp. 41-42. 
In those industries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works Act 
referred to in the text) has been in force for some time, tn,e obstacles in the 
way of the education clauses have, in recent years, been overcome. In indus- 
tries not under the Act, the views of Mr. J. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, 
still extensively prevail. He informed Mr. White, one of the Inquiry Commis- 
sioners: "As far as I can see, the greater amount of education which a part of 
the working-class has enjoyed for some years past is an evil. It is dangerous, 
because it makes them independent." ("Children's Empl. Comm., Fourth 
Report," Lond., 1865, p. 253.) 

2 "Mr. E., a manufacturer. . . informed me that he employed females 
exclusively at his power-looms . . . gives a decided preference to married 
females, especially those who have families at home dependent on them for 
support; they are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females, and are 
compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. 
Thus are the- virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character to be per- 
verted to her injury— thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature 
is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours' Factory Bill. 
The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. 20.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 403 

b. Prolongation of the Working-Day 

If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the 
productiveness of labour — i. e., for shortening the working-time 
required in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands 
of capital the most powerful means, in those industries first 
invaded by it, for lengthening the working-day beyond all bounds 
set by human nature. It creates, on the one hand, new condi- 
tions by which capital is enabled to give free scope to this its 
constant tendency, and on the other hand, new motives with 
which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of others. 

In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements 
of labour become automatic, things moving and working inde- 
pendent of the workman. They are thenceforth an industrial 
perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not 
meet with certain natural obstructions in the weak bodies and 
the strong wills of its human attendants. The automaton, as 
capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in the person of 
the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore animat- 
ed by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered by 
that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man. 1 This resistance 
is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, 
and by the more pliant and docile character of the women and 
children employed on it. 2 



1 "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been 
forced far beyond its average strength. " (Rob. Owen: "Observations on the 
Effects of the Manufacturing System," 2nd Ed., Lond., 1817.) 

2 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of 
appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of at- 
tributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping 
of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory system, on 
workhouses and orphanages, by means of which robbery, unresisting mater- 
ial for exploitation was procured. Thus, for instance, Fielden, himself a 
manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were 
brought about by the circumstance of so great a number oi destitute chil- 
dren being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters 
were independent of the hands, and that having once established the cus- 
tom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, 
they could impose it on their neighbours with the greater facility." 
(J. Fielden: "The Curse of the Factory System", Lond., 1836, p. 11.) With 
reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the factory inspector, says in 
his report of 1844: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women 
who, for many weeks in succession, except for a few days, are employed 
from 6 a.m. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 
5 days of the week they have only 6 hours left out of the 24, for going 
to and from their homes and resting in bed." 



404 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely 
proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. The 
longer the life of the machine, the greater is the mass of the prod- 
ucts over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, 
and the less is the portion of that value added to each single com- 
modity. The active lifetime of a machine is, however, clearly 
dependent on the length of the working-day, or on the duration of 
the daily labour-process multiplied by the number of days for 
which the process is carried on. 

The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional 
to its working-time. And even if it were so, a machine working 

16 hours daily for 7y years, covers as long a working period 

as, and transmits to the total product no more value than, the 
same machine would if it worked only 8 hours daily for 15 years. 
But in the first case the value of the machine would be repro- 
duced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capitalist would, 

by this use of the machine, absorb in 1-^ years as much surplus- 
value as in the second case he would in 15. 

The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. 
The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the 
other from non-use, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. 
The latter kind is due to the elements. The former is more or less 
directly proportional, the latter to a certain extent inversely 
proportional, to the use of the machine. 1 

But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine 
also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. It loses 
exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being pro- 
duced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competi- 
tion with it. 2 In both cases, be the machine ever so young and 
full of life, its value is no longer determined by the labour actually 
materialised in it, but by the labour-time requisite to reproduce 
either it or the better machine. It has, therefore, lost value more 
or less. The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, 
the less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the 
working-day, the shorter is that period. When machinery is first 



1 "Occasion . . . injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mecha- 
nism by inaction." (Ure, 1. c.,p. 28.) 

2 The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862) before referred to 
says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "allowance for deterioration 
of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising 
from the superseding of machines before they are worn out, by others of a 
new and better construction." 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 405 

introduced into an industry, new methods of reproducing it more 
cheaply follow blow upon blow, * and so do improvements, that not 
only affect individual parts and details of the machine, but its 
entire build. It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of ma- 
chinery that this special incentive to the prolongation of the work- 
ing-day makes itself felt most acutely. 2 

Given the length of the working-day, all other circumstances 
remaining the same, the exploitation of double the number of 
workmen demands, not only a doubling of that part of constant 
capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also 
of that part which is laid out in raw material and auxiliary sub- 
stances. The lengthening of the working-day, on the other hand, 
allows of production on an extended scale without any alteration 
in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings. 3 . 
Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus-value, but the 
outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. It is true that this takes 
place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working-day; 
but in the case under consideration, the change is more marked, 
because the capital converted into the instruments of labour pre- 
ponderates to a greater degree. 4 The development of the factory 
system fixes a constantly increasing portion of the capital in a 
form, in which, on the one hand, its value is capable of continual 
self-expansion, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use- 
value and exchange-value whenever it loses contact with living 
labour. "When a labourer," said Mr. Ashworth, a cotton magnate, 



1 "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly- 
invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction of 
the second." (Babbage, 1. c, p. 211.) 

2 "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for 
making patent netwereso great that a machine in good repair which had cost 
£1,200, sold a few years after for £60 . . . improvements succeeded each oth- 
er so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were abandoned 
in the hands of their makers, because new improvements had superseded their 
utility." (Babbage, I.e., p. 233.) In these stormy, go-ahead times, therefore, 
the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working-day, by means of double 
sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to 24. 

3 "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets 
and the alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions will 
constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating 
capital without employing additional fixed capital ... if additional quan- 
tities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional ex- 
pense for buildings and machinery." (R. Torrens: "On Wages and Combina- 
tion." London, 1834, p. 64.) 

4 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake ol completeness, for 
I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the surplus-value to 
the total capital advanced, until I come to the third book. 



406 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



to Professor Nassau W. Senior, "lays down his spade, he renders 
useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteenpence. When one 
of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has 
cost £100,000." * Only fancy! making "useless" for a single moment, 
a capital that has cost £100,000! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a 
single one of our people should ever leave the factory! The in- 
creased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received 
from Ashworth clearly perceives, makes a constantly increasing 
lengthening of the working-day "desirable." 2 

Machinery produces relative surplus-value; not only by di- 
rectly depreciating the value of labour-power, and by indirectly 
cheapening the same through cheapening the commodities that 
enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced 
sporadically into an industry, by converting the labour employed 
by the owner of that machinery, into labour of a higher degree and 
greater efficacy, by raising the social value of the article produced 
above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to 
replace the value of a day's labour-power by a smaller portion of 
the value of a day's product. During this transition period, when 
the use of machinery is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore 
exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly 
"the sunny time of this his first love," by prolonging the working- 
day as much as possible. The magnitude of the profit whets his 
appetite for more profit. 

As the use of machinery becomes more general in a partic- 
ular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to its 
individual value, and the law that surplus-value does not arise 
from the labour-power that has been replaced by the machinery, 
but from the labour-power actually employed in working with 
the machinery, asserts itself. Surplus-value arises from variable 
capital alone, and we saw that the amount of surplus-value depends 
on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus-value and the number of 
the workmen simultaneously employed. Given the length of the 

1 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act." London, 1837, pp. 13, 14. 

2 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital . . . makes long 
hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &amp;c, "the 
motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by 
which a large proportion of fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. c, pp. 
11-13.) "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same 
proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for instance, 
rent, rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent 
servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges upon a 
manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases 
as the production decreases." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st. Oct., 1862," 
P- 19.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 407 

working-day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the rela- 
tive duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus-labour 
in a day. The number of the labourers simultaneously employed 
depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant 
capital. Now, however much the use of machinery may increase the 
surplus-labour at the expense of the necessary labour by heighten- 
ing the productiveness of labour, it is clear that it attains this 
result, only by diminishing the number of workmen employed by 
a given amount of capital. It converts what was formerly variable 
capital, invested in labour-power, into machinery which, being 
constant capital, does not produce surplus-value. It is impossible, 
for instance, to squeeze as much surplus-value out of 2 as out of 
24 labourers. If each of these 24 men gives only one hour of sur- 
plus-labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of surplus-la- 
bour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. Hence, the 
application of machinery to the production of surplus-value implies 
a contradiction which is immanent in it, since of the two factors of 
the surplus-value created by a given amount of capital, one, the 
rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing 
the other, the number of workmen. This contradiction comes to 
light, as soon as by the general employment of machinery in a 
given industry, the value of the machine-produced commodity 
regulates the value of all commodities of the same sort; and it is 
this contradiction, that in its turn, drives the capitalist, without 
his being conscious of the fact, l to excessive lengthening of the 
working-day, in order that he may compensate the decrease in 
the relative number of labourers exploited, by an increase not 
only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus-labour. 

If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the 
one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive 
lengthening of the working-day, and radically changes, as well the 
methods of labour, as also the character of the social working organ- 
ism, in such a manner as to break down all opposition to this tend- 
ency, on the other hand it produces, partly by opening out to the 
capitalist new strata of the working-class, previously inaccessible 
to him, partly by setting free the labourers it supplants, a surplus 
working population, 2 which is compelled to submit to the dictation 



1 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who 
are embued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent contradiction, 
will appear from the first part of the third book. 

2 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not 
only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a "redundant 
population.** 



408 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



of capital. Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of 
Modern Industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and 
natural restriction on the length of the working-day. Hence, too, 
the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for 
shortening labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means for 
placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his fam- 
ily, at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of expanding 
the value of his capital. "If," dreamed Aristotle, the greatest 
thinker of antiquity, "if every tool, when summoned, or even of 
its own accord, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations 
of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the tripods of Hephaestos 
went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' 
shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no 
need either of apprentices for the master workers, or of slaves for 
the lords." 1 And Antipatros, a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, 
hailed the invention of the water-wheel for grinding corn, an in- 
vention that is the elementary form of all machinery, as the giver 
of freedom to female slaves, and the bringer back of the golden 
age. 2 Oh! those heathens! They understood, as the learned Bastiat, 
and before him the still wiser MacCulloch have discovered, noth- 
ing of Political Economy and Christianity. They did not, for 
example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of length- 
ening the working-day. They perhaps excused the slavery of one 
on the ground that it was a means to the full development of 
another. But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few 



1 F. Biese. "Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol. 2. Berlin, 1842, p. 408. 

8 I give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings 
Into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to division of 
labour, the antithesis between the views of the ancients and the moderns. 
"Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and softly sleep. Let 
Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the 
girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip lightly over the wheels, 
so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of 
the revolving stones. Let us live the life of our fathers, and let us rest from 
work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us." 

"Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Mullerinnen. und schlafet 
Sanft! es verkiinde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst! 
Dao hat die Arbeit der Madchen den Nymphen befohlen, 
Und itzt hiipfen sie leicht iiber die Rader dahin, 
DaB die erschutterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich walzen, 
Und im Kreise die Last drehen des walzenden Steins. 
LaBt uns leben das Leben der Vater, und lafit uns der Gaben 
Arbeitslos uns freun, welche die Gottin uns schenkt.'" 
(Gedichte aus dem Griechischen iibersetzt von Christian Graf zo 
Stolberg, Hamburg, 1782.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 409 

crude and half-educated parvenus, might become "eminent spin- 
ners," "extensive sausage-makers," and "influential shoe-black 
dealers," to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity. 

c. Intensification of Labour 

The immoderate lengthening of the working-day, produced 
by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the 
part of society, the very sources of whose life are menaced; and, 
thence, to a normal working-day whose length is fixed by law. 
Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met with, name- 
ly, the intensification of labour, develops into great importance. 
Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had reference primarily to 
the extension or duration of the labour, its intensity being as- 
sumed as given. We now proceed to consider the substitution of a 
more intensified labour for labour of more extensive duration, and 
the degree of the former. 

It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery 
spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen habitu- 
ated to machinery accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of 
labour increase as a natural consequence. Thus in England, dur- 
ing half a century, lengthening of the working-day went hand in 
hand with increasing intensity of factory labour. Nevertheless the 
reader will clearly see, that where we have labour, not carried 
on by fits and starts, but repeated day after day with unvarying 
uniformity, a point must inevitably be reached, where extension 
of the working-day and intensity of the labour mutually exclude 
one another, in such a way that lengthening of the working-day 
becomes compatible only with a lower degree of intensity, and a 
higher degree of intensity, only with a shortening of the working- 
day. So soon as the gradually surging revolt of the working-class 
compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of la- 
bour, and to begin by imposing a normal working-day on factories 
proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus- 
value by the prolongation of the working-day was once for all 
put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all 
its might into the production of relative surplus-value, by hasten- 
ing on the further improvement of machinery. At the same time 
a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value. Gen- 
erally speaking, the mode of producing relative surplus-value 
consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as 
to enable him to produce more in a given time with the same ex- 
penditure of labour. Labour-time continues to transmit as before 



410 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



the same value to the total product, but this unchanged amount 
of exchange-value is spread over more use-values; hence the value 
of each single commodity sinks. Otherwise, however, so soon as 
the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. The 
immense impetus it gives to the development of productive power, 
and to economy in the means of production, imposes on the work- 
man increased expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened 
tension of labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the 
working-day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attain- 
able only within the limits of the shortened working-day. This 
condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thence- 
forward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity of labour. 
In addition to a measure of its extension, i.e., duration, labour 
now acquires a measure of its intensity or of the degree of its con- 
densation or density. x The denser hour of the ten hours' working- 
day contains more labour, i.e., expended labour-power, than the 
more porous hour of the twelve hours' working-day. The product 
therefore of one of the former hours has as much or more value than 

has the product of W of the latter hours. Apart from the increased 

yield of relative surplus-value through the heightened productive- 
ness of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the cap- 

1 2 

italist say by 3-~- hours of surplus-labour, and 6— hours of neces- 

o o 

sary labour, as was previously produced by four hours of surplus- 
labour and eight hours of necessary labour. 

We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified? 

The first effect of shortening the working-day results from 
the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in 
an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. Hence, with- 
in certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained 
by the increasing tension of labour-power. That the workman 
moreover really does expend more labour-power, is ensured by 
the mode in which the capitalist pays him. 2 In those industries, 
such as potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the 



1 There are, of course, always differences in the intensities of the labour 
in various industries But these differences are, as Adam Smith has shown, 
compensated to a partial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each 
sort of labour. Labour-time, as a measure of value, is not, however, affected 
in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its 
intensity, are two antithetical and mutually exclusive expressions for one 
and the same quantity of labour. 

2 Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI. ol 
this book. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 411 

introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly shown that the 
mere shortening of the working-day increases to a wonderful degree 
the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and energy of the 
labour. 1 It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect was pro- 
duced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman 
on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had al- 
ready created the strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the re- 
duction of the working-day to less than twelve hours was being de- 
bated, the masters almost unanimously declared "that their over- 
lookers in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost 
no time," that "the extent of vigilance and attention on the part 
of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased," and, there- 
fore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions remain- 
ing unaltered, "to expect in a well-managed factory any impor- 
tant result from increased attention of the workmen was an 
absurdity." 2 This assertion was contradicted by experiments. Mr. 
Robert Gardner reduced the hours of labour in his two large fac- 
tories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve 
to eleven hours a day. The result of about a year's working was that 
"the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and 
the workpeople as a whole earned in eleven hours as much wages 
as they did before in twelve." 3 1 pass over the experiments made in 
the spinning and carding rooms, because they were accompanied 
by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines. But in the weav- 
ing department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy 
articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the 
conditions of the work. The result was: "From 6th January to 
20th April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages 

of each hand 10s. lyd., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with 

day of eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. 3yd." 4 Here 

we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, 
and entirely in consequence of more steady application and econ- 
omy of time by the workpeople. While they got the same wages 
and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same 
amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such 



1 See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865." 

2 Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 
1845, pp. 20-21. 

3 1. c, p. 19. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly 
wages depended on the quantity produced. 

4 1. c, p. 20. 



412 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



items, for one hour. Similar experiments, and with the like success, 
were carried out in the mills of Messrs. Horrocks and Jacson. * 

The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, 
the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by 
enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time. 
So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery be- 
comes in the hands of capital the objective means, systemati- 
cally employed for squeezing out more -labour in a given time. 
This is effected in two ways: by increasing the speed of the machin- 
ery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent. Im- 
proved construction of the machinery isnecessary, partly because 
without it greater pressure cannot be put on the workman, and 
partly because the shortened hours of labour force the capitalist 
to exercise the strictest watch over the cost of production. The 
improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed, 
and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater 
economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller con- 
sumption of coal more machinery with the same engine. The im- 
provements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, 
and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older ma- 
chinery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a 
constantly decreasing minimum. Finally, the improvements 
in the operative machines have, while reducing their size, in- 
creased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; 
or, while increasing the size of their framework, have also in- 
creased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spin- 
ning-mules, or have added to the speed of these working parts by 
imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years 
ago increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by 
one- fifth. 

The reduction of the working-day to 12 hours dates in Eng- 
land from 1832. In 1836 a manufacturer stated: "The labour now 
undergone in the factories is much greater than it used to be 
. . . compared with thirty or forty years ago. . . owing to 
the greater attention and activity required by the greatly in- 
creased speed which is given to the machinery." 2 In the year 1844, 
Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of Com- 



1 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. 
The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more spirit, we 
have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at nijtfht, and one active 
and cheerful spirit pervades the whole mill, from the youngest piecer to the 
oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other." (1. c, p. 21.) 

8 John Fielden, 1. c, p. 32. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 413 

mons the following statements, supported by documentary evi- 
dence: 

"The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of 
manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such 
operations. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that 
would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also 
prodigiously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by 
its fearful movements. . . in 1815, the labour of following a 
pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40— reckoning 12 hours 
to the working-day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. 
In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, 
spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and 
frequently more. In 1835 " (query— 1815 or 1825?) "the spinner 
put up daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a 
total of 1,640 stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the 
spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 
4,400. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in 
some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater . . . 
I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the la- 
bour is progressively increasing — increasing not only because the 
distance to be travelled is greater, but because the quantity of 
goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in pro- 
portion than before; and, moreover, because an inferior species 
of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work . . . 
In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour. 
One person there does the work formerly divided between two. In 
the weaving-room, where a vast number of persons are employed, 
and principally females . . . the labour has increased within the 
last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the increased speed of 
the machinerv in spinning. In 1838, the number of hanks spun 
per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819, 
the number of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was 
60— in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour." 1 

In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had 
already been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there 
appeared to be a justification for the assertion made at that 
time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress 
in that direction was impossible, and therefore that every further 
reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened production. The 
apparent correctness of their reasons will be best shown by the 



Lord Ashley, J. c, pp. 6-9, passim. 



414 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the fac- 
tory inspector, their ever watchful censor. 

"Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regu- 
lated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of 
the mill-owner to drive it at the utmost rate of speed consistent 
with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the 
machinery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation of the 
quality of the article manufactured; and the capability of the 
workman to follow the motion without a greater exertion than 
he can sustain for a constancy. One of the most important pro- 
blems, therefore, which the owner of a factory has to solve, is to 
find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with a due 
regard to the above conditions. It frequently happens that he 
finds has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than 
counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slack- 
en his pace. I therefore concluded, that as an active and intel- 
ligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would 
not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. 
I further assumed that the operative paid by piece-work, would 
exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of contin- 
uing at the same rate. M1 Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion 
that a reduction of the working-hours below twelve would ne- 
cessarily diminish production. 2 He himself, ten years later, 
cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how much he under-estimat- 
ed in that year the elasticity of machinery, and of man's labour- 
power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme 
by the compulsory shortening of the working-day. 

We now come to the period that follows the introduction ol 
the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, 
silk, and flax mills. 

"The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, 
and upon mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of 
the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, 
Is now (1862) 5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is 
now 6,000 times a minute, amounting in the former case to one- 
tenth, and in the second case to one-fifth additional increase. " 8 
James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near 
Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written 
In 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine 



1 Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and 
from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. 20. 
M. c, p. 22. 
8 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. 62. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 415 

made between the years 1848 and 1852. After remarking that the 
horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the of- 
ficial returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828, * is 
only nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, 
he goes on to say: "I am confident that from the same weight of 
steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per 
cent, more duty or work performed on the average, and that in 
many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the 
restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are 
now yielding upwards of 100." .... "The modern steam-engine of 
100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much greater force 
than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, 
the capacity and construction of the boilers, &amp;c," ... "Although 
the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse- 
power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in 
proportion to the machinery." 2 "In the year 1850, the factories of 
the United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to 
give motion to 25,638,716 spindles and 301,445 looms. The num- 
ber of spindles and looms in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of 
the former, and 369,205 of the latter, which, reckoning the force of 
the nominal horse-power required to be the same as in 1850, would 
require a force equal to 175,000 horses, but the actual power given 
in the return for 1856 is 161, 435, less by above 10,000 horses than, 
calculating upon the basis of the return of 1850, the factories 
ought to have required in 1856." 3 "The facts thus brought out by 
the Return (of 1856) appear to be that the factory system is in- 
creasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are 
employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, 
there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; 
that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight 
of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an 
increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in 
machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by increase of speed 
of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes." 4 

1 This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862. In it the actual 
horse-power of the modern steam engines and water-wheels appears in place 
of the nominal. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the 
spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" of 1839, 1850, and 1856); 
further, in the case of woollen mills, the number of "gigs" is added, a distinc- 
tion made between jute and hemp mills on the one hand and flax mills on the 
other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time inserted in the report. 

2 "Rep of Insp of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. 13-14, 20 and 
1852, p. 23. 

• 1. c, pp. 14-15. 

* 1. c, p. 20. 



416 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



"The great improvements made in machines of every kind 
have raised their productive power very much. Without any 
doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour .... gave the 
impulse to these improvements. The latter, combined with the 
more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect, that at 
least as much is produced in the shortened (by two hours or one- 
sixth) working-day as was previously produced during the long- 
er one." 1 

One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the 
manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploita- 
tion of labour-power. From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional 
increase in English cotton and other factories was 32%, while 
from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to 86%. 

But however great the progress of English industry had been 
during the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a 
working-day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the next 
period of 6 years from 1856 to 1862. In silk factories, for instance, 
there were in 1856, spindles 1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 
1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. But the number of operatives 
was, in 1856, 56,131; in 1862, 52,429. The increase in the spindles 
was therefore 26.9% and in the looms 15.6%, while the number of 
the operatives decreased 7%. In the year 1850 there were employed 
in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 
51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (decrease 2,7%). But if we deduct 
the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not 
in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of 
6pindles remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after 
1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases dou- 
bled. The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 
32,617; in 1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. The number of the 
operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; 
included in these, however, the children under 14 years of age were, 
in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862, 13,178. In spite, therefore, 
of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 
1856, the total number of the workpeople employed decreased, 
and that of the children exploited increased. 2 

On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of 
Commons: "I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts 
of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work 
in the factories is, in consequence of the improvements in machin- 

1 "Reports, &amp;c, for 31st October, 1858," pp. 9-10. Compare "Reports. 
&amp;c, for 30th April, 1860," p. 30, sqq. 

a "Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. 100 and 130. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 417 

cry, constantly on the increase. Instead of as formerly one person 
with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three 
looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person 
to tent four. Twelve hours' work, as is evident from the facts ad- 
duced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. It is therefore 
self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory 
operative has increased during the last 10 years." 1 

Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and 
with justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, 
yet they admit that the shortening of the hours of labour has 
already called forth such an intensification of the labour as is in- 
jurious to the health of the workman and to his capacity for work. 
"In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting 
state of excitement necessary to enable the workers satisfactorily 
to mind the machinery, the motion of which has been greatly 
accelerated within the last few years, seems to me not unlikely 
to be one of the causes of that excess of mortality from lung dis- 
ease, which Dr. Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report 
on this subject." 2 There cannot be the slightest doubt that the 
tendency that urges capital, so soon as a prolongation of the hours 
of labour is once for all forbidden, to compensate itself, by a 
systematic heightening of the intensity of labour, and to convert 
every improvement in machinery into a more perfect means of 
exhausting the workman, must soon lead to a state of things in 
which a reduction of the hours of labour will again be inevitable. 8 
On the other hand, the rapid advance of English industry between 
1848 and the present time, under the influence of a day of 10 hours, 
surpasses the advance made between 1833 and 1847, when the 
day was 12 hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the 
advance made during the half century after the first introduction 
of the factory system, when the working-day was without limits. 4 



1 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 
26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old power- 
looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. The cost of weaving apiece 
of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s. 9d. to 5 x / 8 d. 

"Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three piecers was not required 
to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. At the 
present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, 
and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841." (Alex. 
Redgrave, Factory Inspector — in the Journal of Arts, 5th January, 1872.) 

2 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 1861," pp. 25, 26. 

8 The agitation for a working-day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in 
Lancashire among the factory operatives. 

4 The following few figures indicate the increase in the "factories" of 
the United Kingdom since 1848: 



418 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION IV.— THE FACTORY 

At the commencement of this chapter we considered that 
which we may call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery or- 
ganised into a system. We there saw how machinery, by annexing 
the labour of women and children, augments the number of hu- 
man beings who form the material for capitalistic exploitation, 
how it confiscates the whole of the workman's disposable time, 
by immoderate extension of the hours of labour, and how finally 
its progress, which allows of enormous increase of production in 
shorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of systematically 
getting more work done in a shorter time, or of exploiting labour- 
power more intensely. We now turn to the factory as a whole, and 
that in its most perfect form. 

Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on 
the one hand as "Combined co-operation of many orders of work- 
people, adult and young, in tending with assiduous skill, a system 
of productive machines, continuously impelled by a central power" 
the prime mover); on the other hand, as "a vast automaton, corn- 



Quantity 

Exported, 

1848. 



Quantity 

Exported, 

1851. 



Quantity 

Exported, 

1860. 



Quantity 

Exported, 

1805. 



COTTON 

Cotton yarn . . . . 

Sewing thread . . . 

Cotton cloth . . . 

FLAX &amp; HEMP 

Yarn 

Cloth 

SILK 

Yarn 

Cloth 

WOOL 
Woollen and ^ 
Worsted yarn3 / 
Cloth 



lbs. 

135,831 

lbs. 



162 



yds. 
1,091,373,930 



lbs. 
11,722,182 

yds. 
88,901,519 



lbs. 

466,825 

yds. 



lbs. 



yds. 



lbs. 
143,966,106 

lbs. 
4,392, 176 

yds. 
1,543,161,789 



lbs. 
18,841,326 

yds. 
129,106,753 



lbs. 

462,513 

yds. 

1, 181,455 



lbs. 
14,670,880 

yds. 
241,120,973 



lbs. 

197,343,655 

lbs. 

6,297,554 

yds. 

2,776,218,427 



lbs. 
31,210,612 

yds. 
143,996,773 



lbs. 

897,402 

yds. 

1,307,293 



lbs. 
27,533,968 

yds. 
190, 381,5 37 



lbs. 
103,751 ,455 

lbs. 
4,648,611 

yds. 
2,015,237,851 



lbs. 
36,777,334 

yds. 
247,012,529 



lbs. 

812,589 

yds. 

2,369,837 



lbs. 

1 ,669,267 

yds. 

278,837,438 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 



419 



posed of various mechanical and intellectual organs,, acting in 
uninterrupted concert for the production of a common object, all 
of them being subordinate to a self-regulated moving force." These 
two descriptions are far from being identical. In one, the col- 
lective labourer, or social body of labour, appears as the domin- 
ant subject, and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the 
other, the automaton itself is the subject, and the workmen are 
merely conscious organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs 
of the automaton, and together with them, subordinated to the 
central moving-power. The first description is applicable to every 
possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second is 
characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern 
factory system. Ure prefers therefore, to describe the central machine, 
from which the motion comes, not only as an automaton, but as 



Value Export- 
ed, 1848. 



Value Export- 
ed. 1.851. 



Value Export- 
ed, 1860. 



Value Export' 
ed. 1865. 



COTTON 

Yam 

Cloth 

FLAX &amp; HEMP 

Yarn 

Cloth 

SILK 

Yarn 

Cloth 

WOOL 

Yarn 

Cloth 



5,927,831 
16,753,369 



493,449 
2,802,789 



77,789 



776,975 
5.733,828 



6,634,026 
23,454,810 



951,426 
4,107,396 



195,380 
1,130,398 



1,484,544 
8,377,183 



9,870,875 
42,141,505 



1,801,272 
4,804,803 



918,342 
1,587,303 



3,843,450 
12,156,998 



10,351,04 
46,903,796 



2,505,497 
9,155,318 



768,067 
1,409,221 



5,424,017 
20,102.259 



See the Blue books "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom," Nos. 8 
and 13. Lond., 1861 and 1866. In Lancashire the number of mills increased 
only 4 per cent, between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 
1856; and 33 per cent, between 1856 and 1862; while the persons employed 
in them during each of the above periods of 11 years increased absolutely, 
but diminished relatively. (See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1862," 
p. 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in Lancashire. We may form an idea 
of the stupendous nature ol the cotton trade in that district when we con- 
sider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the United King- 
dom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the spindles 83.3 percent., of the power- 
looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and 
of the total number of persons employed 58.2 per cent. (1. c, pp. 62-63.) 



420 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



an autocrat. "In these spacious halls the benignant power of steam 
summons around him his myriads of willing menials." 1 

Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it 
passes over to the machine. The capabilities of the tool are eman- 
cipated from the restraints that are inseparable from human la- 
bour-power. Thereby the technical foundation on which is based 
the division of labour in Manufacture, is swept away. Hence, 
in the place of the hierarchy of specialised workmen that character- 
ises manufacture, there steps, in the automatic factory, a tenden- 
cy to equalise and reduce to one and the same level every kind of 
work that has to be done by the minders of the machines; 2 in the 
place of the artificially produced differentiations of the detail 
workmen, step the natural differences of age and sex. 

So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it is 
primarily a distribution of the workmen among the specialised 
machines; and of masses of workmen, not however organised 
into groups, among the various departments of the factory, 
in each of which they work at a number of similar machines 
placed together; their co-operation, therefore, is only simple. 
The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by 
the connexion between the head workman and his few assist- 
ants. The essential division is, into workmen who are actually 
employed on the machines (among whom are included a few 
who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost 
exclusively children) of these workmen. Among the attend- 
ants are reckoned more or less all "Feeders" who supply the ma- 
chines with the material to be worked. In addition to these two 
principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant class of 
persons, whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the ma- 
chinery and repair it from time to time; such as engineers, mechan- 
ics, joiners, &amp;c. This is a superior class of workmen, some of them 
scientifically educated, others brought up to a trade; it is distinct 
from the factory operative class, and merely aggregated to it. 3 
This division of labour is purely technical. 



1 Ure, 1. c, p. 18. 

2 Ure, I. c, p. 31. See Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 140-141. 

3 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which mislead- 
ing it would be possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the Eng- 
lish factory legislation excludes from its operation the class of labourers 
last mentioned in the text, while the parliamentary returns expressly include 
in the category of factory operatives, not only engineers, mechanics, &amp;c. f 
but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehousemen, packers, &amp;c, 
in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself. 



MACHINERY AMD MODERN INDUSTRY 421 

To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from 
childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own move- 
ments to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. 
When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold 
machines, working simultaneously and in concert, the co-opera- 
tion based upon it, requires the distribution of various groups 
of workmen among the different kinds of machines. But the 
employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crys- 
tallising this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, 
by the constant annexation of a particular man to a particular 
function. 1 Since the motion of the whole system does not proceed 
from the workman, but from the machinery, a change of persons 
can take place at any time without an interruption of the work. 
The most striking proof of this is afforded by the relays system, 
put into operation by the manufacturers during their revolt from 
1848-1850. Lastly, the quickness with which machine work is 
learnt by young people, does away with the necessity of bringing 
up for exclusive employment by machinery, a special class of oper- 
atives. 2 With regard to the work of the mere attendants, it can, 
to some extent, be replaced in the mill by machines, 3 and owing 



1 Ure grants this. He says, "in case of need," the workmen can be moved 
at the will of the manager from one machine to another, and he triumphantly 
exclaims: "Such a change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that 
divides the labour, and to one workman assigns the task of fashioning the head 
of a needle, to another the sharpening of the point." He had much better have 
asked himself, why this "old routine" is departed from in the automatic 
factory, only "in case of need." 

2 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American 
Civil War, the factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to 
do the roughest of work, such as road-making, &amp;c. The English "ateliers na- 
tionaux" ofl862 and the following years, established for the benefit of the des- 
titute cotton operatives, differ from the French of 1848 in this, that in the 
latter the workmen had to do unproductive work at the expense of the state, 
in the former they had to do productive municipal work to the advantage of 
the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the regular workmen, with whom 
they were thus thrown into competition. "The physical appearance of the 
cotton operatives is unquestionably improved. This I attribute ... as 
to the men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 
31st Oct., 1863," p. 59.) The writer here alludes to the Preston factory opera- 
tives, who were employed on Preston Moor. 

3 An example: The various mechanical apparatus introduced since the 
Act of 1844 into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children. So soon 
as it shall happen that the children of the manufacturers themselves have to 
go through a course of schooling as helpers in the mill, this almost unexplored 
territory of mechanics will soon make remarkable progress. "Of machinery, 
perhaps self-acting mules are as dangerous as any other kind. Most of the 
accidents from them happen to little children, from their creeping under the 



422 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



to its extreme simplicity, it allows of a rapid and constant change 
of the individuals burdened with this drudgery. 

Although then, technically speaking, the old system of 
division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs 
on in the factory, as a traditional habit handed down from Man- 
ufacture, and is afterwards S3 r stematically re-moulded and es* 
tablished in a more hideous form by capital, as a means of exploit- 
ing labour-power. The life-long speciality of handling one and 
the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of serving 
one and the same machine. Machinery is put to a wrong use, with 
the object of transforming the workman, from his very childhood, 
into a part of a detail-machine. 1 In this way, not only are the ex- 
penses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same 
time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and 
therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. Here as every- 
where else, we must distinguish between the increased produc- 
tiveness due to the development of the social process of production, 
and that due to the capitalist exploitation of that process. In hand- 
icrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in 
the factory, the machine makes use of him. There the movements 
of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the move- 
ments of the machine that he must follow. In manufacture the 
workmen are parts of a living mechanism. In the factory we have a 
lifeless mechanism independent of the workman, who becomes 
its mere living appendage. "The miserable routine of endless drudg- 
ery and toil in which the same mechanical process is gone through 
over and over again, is like the labour of Sisyphus. The burden of 
labour, like the rock, keeps ever falling back on the worn-out la- 
bourer." 2 At the same time that factory work exhausts the nervous 



mules to sweep the floor whilst the mules are in motion. Several 'minders' 
have been fined for this offence, but without much general benefit. If machine 
makers would only invent a self-sweeper, by whose use the necessity for 
these little children to creep under the machinery might be prevented, it 
would be a happy addition to our protective measures." ("Reports of Insp. 
of Fact, for 31st. Oct. 1866," p. 63.) 

1 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machin- 
ery not as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of detail 
operations for the benefit of the labourer himself. 

2 F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217. Even an ordinary and optimist Free-trader, like 
Mr. Molinari, goes so far as to say, "Un homme s'use plus vite en surveillant, 

3uinze heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, 
ans le meme espace de temps, sa force physique. Ce travail de surveillance 
qui servirait peut-etre d'utile gymnastique a l'intelligertce, s'il n'etait pas 
trop prolonge, detruit a la longue, par son exces, et l'intelligence, et le corps 
meme." (G. de Molinari: "fitudes ficonomiques". Paris, 1846.) 



MACHINERY AND MODFRN INDUSTRY 423 

system to the uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of 
the muscles, and confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily 
and intellectual activity. l The lightening of the labour, even, 
becomes a sort of torture, since the machine does not free the 
labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest. Every 
kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour- 
process, but also a process of creating surplus-value, has this in 
common, that it is not the workman that employs the instruments 
of labour, but the instruments of labour that employ the work- 
man. But it is only in the factory system that this inversion for 
the first time acquires technical and palpable reality. By means 
of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour 
confronts the labourer, during the labour-process, in the shape 
of capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living 
labour-power. The separation of the intellectual powers of produc- 
tion from the manual labour, and the conversion of those powers 
into the might of capital over labour, is, as we have already shown, 
finally completed by modern industry erected on the foundation 
of machinery. The special skill of each individual insignificant 
factory operative vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before 
the science, the gigantic physical forces, and the mass of la- 
bour that are embodied in the factory mechanism and, together 
with that mechanism, constitute the power of the "master." This 
"master," therefore, in whose brain the machinery and his mo- 
nopoly of it are inseparably united, whenever he falls out with his 
"hands," contemptuously tells them: "The factory operatives should 
keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low 
species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily 
acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which 
by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as 
well as abundantly, acquired. . . . The master's machinery real- 
ly plays a far more important part in the business of produc- 
tion than the labour and the skill of the operative, which six 
months' education can teach, and a common labourer can learn." 2 
The technical subordination of the workman to the uniform motion 
of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of 
the body of workpeople, consisting as it does of individuals of 
both sexes and of all ages, give rise to a barrack discipline, which 



1 F. Engels, 1. c, p. 216. 

2 "The Master Spinners' and Manufacturers' Defence Fund. Report of 
the Committee." Manchester, 1854, p. 17. We shall see hereafter, that the 
"master" can sing quite another song, when he is threatened with the loss 
of his "living" automaton. 



424 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

is elaborated into a complete system in the factory, and which 
fully develops the before mentioned labour of overlooking, thereby 
dividing the workpeople into operatives and overlookers, into 
private soldiers and sergeants of an industrial army. "The main 
difficulty [in the automatic factory]... lay ... above all in training 
human beings to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to 
identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex 
automaton. To devise and administer a successful code of factory 
discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the 
Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even 
at the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its 
labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible 
to convert persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory 
hands." 1 The factory code in which capital formulates, like a 
private legislator, and at his own good will, his autocracy over 
his workpeople, unaccompanied by that division of responsi- 
bility, in other matters so much approved of by the bourgeoisie, 
and unaccompanied by the still more approved representative 
system, this code is but the capitalistic caricature of that social 
regulation of the labour-process which becomes requisite in 
co-operation on a great scale, and in the employment in com- 
mon, of instruments of labour and especially of machinery. The 
place of the slave-driver's lash is taken by the overlooker's book 
of penalties. All punishments naturally resolve themselves into 
fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving talent of the 
factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, that a violation of his laws 
is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of them. 9 



1 Ure, 1. c, p. 15. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will 
never dub this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the 18th 
century, he was incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inven- 
tions and the meanest fellow. 

2 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes 
nowhere more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. In it all 
freedom comes to an end both at law and in fact. The workman must be in 
the factory at half past five. If he come a few minutes late, he is punished; 
if he come 10 minutes late, he is not allowed to enter until after breakfast, 
and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. He must eat, drink and sleep at 
word of command... The despotic bell calls him from his bed, calls him from 
breakfast and dinner. And how does he fare in the mill? There the master is 
the absolute law-giver. He makes what regulations he pleases; he alters and 
makes additions to his code at pleasure; and if he insert the veriest nonsense, 
the courts say to the workman: Since you have entered into this contract 
voluntarily, you must now carry it out... These workmen are condemned to 
live, from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily tor- 
ture." (F. Engels, 1. c, p. 217, sq.) What, "the courts say," I will illustrate by 
two examples. One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 1866. In that town a 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 425 

We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under 
which factory labour is carried on. Every organ of sense is 
injured in an equal degree by artificial elevation of the temper-' 
ature, by the dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, 
not to mention danger to life and limb among the thickly crowd- 
ed machinery, which, with the regularity of the seasons, issues 

workman had engaged himself for 2 years in a steelworks. In conse- 
quence of a quarrel with his employer he left the works, and de- 
clared that under no circumstances would he work for that master any 
more. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to 
two months' imprisonment. (If the master break the contract, he can be pro- 
ceeded against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages.) 
After the workman has served his two months, the master invites him to re- 
turn to the works, pursuant to the contract. Workman says: No, he has already 
been punished for the breach. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns 
again, although one of the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a le- 
gal monstrosity, by which a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be 
punished over and over again for the same offence or crime. This judgment 
was given not by the "Great Unpaid," the provincial Dogberries, but by one 
of the highestcourts of justice in London. — [Added in the 4th German edition. — 
This has now been done away with. With few exceptions, e.g., when public 
gas-works are involved, the worker in England is now put on an equal footing 
with the employer in case of breach of contract and can be sued only civilly.— 
F.E.] The second case occurs in Wiltshire at the end of November 1863. 
About 30 power-loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth 
manufacturer at Leower's Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master 
Harrup indulged in the agreeable habit of making deductions from their wages 
for being late in the morning; 6d. for 2 minutes; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. 
6d. for ten minutes. This is at the rate of 9s. per hour, and £4 10s. Od. per 
diem; while the wages of the weavers on the average of a year, never exceeded 
10s. to 12s. weekly. Harrup also appointed a boy to announce the starting time 
by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning: and if 
the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle ceased, the doors 
were closed, and those hands who were outside were fined: and as there was 
no clock on the premises, the unfortunate hands were at the mercy of the 
young Harrup-inspired time-keeper. The hands on strike, mothers of families 
as well as girls, offered to resume work if the time-keeper were replaced -by 
a clock, and a more reasonable scale of fines were introduced. Harrup sum- 
moned 19 women and girls before the magistrates for breach of contract. To 
the utter indignation of all present, they were each mulcted in a fine of 6d. 
and 2s. 6d. for costs. Harrup was followed from the court by a crowd of people 
who hissed him. — A favourite operation with manufacturers is to punish the 
workpeople by deductions made from their wages on account of faults in the 
material worked on. This method gave rise in 1866 to a general strike in the 
English pottery districts. The reports of the Gh. Empl. Com. (1863-1866), 
give cases where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes, by means 
of his labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy 
master. The late cotton crisis also furnished edifying examples of the sagacity 
shown by the factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. Mr. R. 
Baker, the Inspector of Factories, says, "I have myself had lately to direct 
prosecutions against one cotton mill occupier for having in these pinching 



426 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



its list of the killed and wounded in the industrial battle. * Econ- 
omy of the social means of production, matured and forced as in 
a hothouse by the factory system, is turned, in the hands of cap- 
ital, into systematic robbery of what is necessary for the life 
of the workman while he is at work, robbery of space, light, air, 
and of protection to his person against the dangerous and unwhole- 



and painful times deducted lOd. a piece from some of the young workers 
employed by him, for the surgeon's certificate (for which he himself had only 
paid 6d.), when only allowed hy the law to deduct 3d., and by custom nothing 
at all . . . And I have been informed of another, who, in order to keep with- 
out the law, but to attain the same object, charges the poor children who work 
for him a shilling each, as a fee for. learning them the art and mystery of cotton 
spinning, so soon as they are declared by the surgeon fit and proper persons 
for that occupation. There may therefore be undercurrent causes for such 
extraordinary exhibitions as strikes, not only wherever they arise, but par- 
ticularly at such times as the present, which without explanation, render 
them inexplicable to the public understanding." He alludes here to a strike 
of power-loom weavers at Darwen, June, 1863. ("Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 
30 April, 1863," pp. 50-51.) The reports always go beyond their official dates. 
* The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machin- 
ery has had a beneficial effect. "But ... there are other sources of accident 
which did not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased 
speed of the machinery. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles are now pro- 
pelled at increased and increasing rates; fingers must be quicker and defter in 
their movements to take up the broken thread, for, if placed with hesitation 
or carelessness, they are sacrificed. ... A large number of accidents are 
caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to get through their work expedi- 
tiously. It must be remembered that it is of the highest importance to manu- 
facturers that their machinery should be in motion, i.e., producing yarns 
and goods. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, but of produc- 
tion, and the workpeople are urged by the overlookers, who are interested 
in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion; and it 
is no less important to those of the operatives who are paid by the weight or 
piece, that the machines should be kept in motion. Consequently, although 
it is strictly forbidden in many, nay in most factories, that machinery should 
be cleaned while in motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most, 
if not in all, that the workpeople do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe 
rollers and wheels, &amp;c, while their frames are in motion. Thus from this 
cause only, 906 accidents have occurred during the six months. . . . Al- 
though a great deal of cleaning is constantly goingon day by day, yetSaturday 
is generally the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the machinery, 
and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since 
cleaning is not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily 
as possible. Hence "the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and 
especially on Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. On the former 
day the excess is nearly 12 per cent, over the average number of the four 
first days of the week, and on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over 
the average of the preceding five days; or, if the number of working-hours 
on Saturday being taken into account — Vl 2 hours on Saturday as compared 
with 10 x / 2 on other days— there is an excess of 65 per cent, on Saturdays 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 427 

some accompaniments of the productive process, not to mention 
fche robbery of appliances for the comfort of the workman. x Is 
Fourier wrong when he calls factories "tempered bagnos"? 2 

SECTION 5.— THE STRIFE BETWEEN WORKMAN 
AND MACHINE 

The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer 
dates back to the very origin of capital. It raged on through- 
out the whole manufacturing period. 3 But only since the intro- 
duction of machinery has the workman fought against the instru- 
ment of labour itself, the material embodiment of capital. He 
revolts against this particular form of the means of production, 
as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of production. 



over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 
1866," pp. 9, 15, 16, 17.) 

1 In Part I. of Book III. I shall give an account of a recent campaign 
by the English manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts that 
protect the "hands" against dangerous machinery. For the present, let this one 
quotation from the official report of Leonard Horner suffice: "I have heard 
some mill-owners speak with inexcusable levityof some of the accidents; such, 
for instance, as the loss of a finger being a trifling matter. A working-man's 
living and prospects depend so much upon his fingers, that any loss of them is 
a very serious matter to him. When I have heard such inconsiderate remarks 
made, I have usually put this question: Suppose you were in want of an addi- 
tional workman, and two were to apply, both equally well qualified In other 
respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would you engage? 
There never was a hesitation as to the answer."... The manufacturers have 
"mistaken prejudices against what they have &gt;heard represented as a pseudo- 
philanthropic legislation." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1855.") These 
manufacturers are clever folk, and not without reason were they enthusiastic 
for the slave-holders' rebellion. 

2 In those factories that have been longest subject to the Factory Acts, 
with their compulsory limitation of the hours of labour, and other regula- 
tions, many of the older abuses have vanished. The very improvement of 
the machinery demands to a certain extent "improved construction of the 
buildings," and this is an advantage to the workpeople. (See "Rep. of Insp. of 
Fact, for 31st Oct., 1863," p. 109.) 

3 See amongst others, John Houghton: "Husbandry and Trade Im- 
proved." London, 1727. "The Advantages of the East India Trade, 1720.'* 
John Bellers, 1. c. "The masters and their workmen are, unhappily, in a 
perpetual war with each other. The invariable object of the former is to 
get their work done as cheaply as possible; and they do not fail to employ 
every artifice to this purpose, whilst the latter are equally attentive to 
every occasion of distressing their masters into a compliance with higher 
demands." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of 
Provisions," pp. 61-62. Author, the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, quite on the 
side of the workmen.) 



428 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts 
of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving 
ribbons and trimmings, called in Germany Bandmuhle, Schnur- 
miihle, and Muhlenstuhl. These machines were invented in 
Germany. Abbe Lancellotti, in a work that appeared in Venice in 
1636, but which was written in 1579, says as follows: "Anthony 
Miiller of Danzig saw about 50 years ago in that town, a very in- 
genious machine, which weaves 4 to 6 pieces at once. But the Mayor 
being apprehensive that this invention might throw a large number 
of workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly 
strangled or drowned." In Leyden, this machine was not used till 
1629; there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled 
the Town Council to prohibit it. "In hac urbe," says Boxhorn 
(Inst. Pol., 1663), referring to the introduction of this machine 
into Leyden, "ante hos viginti circiter annos instrumentum 
quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus plus panni et facilius 
conficere poterat, quan plures aequali tempore. Hinc turbae 
ortae et querulse textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti 
a magistratu prohibitus est." After making various decrees more 
or less prohibitive against this loom in 1632, 1639, &amp;c, the States 
General of Holland at length permitted it to be used, under cer- 
tain conditions, by the decree of the 15th December, 1661. It was 
also prohibited in Cologne in 1676, at the same time that its in- 
troduction into England was causing disturbances among the work- 
people. By an imperial Edict of 19th Feb., 1685, its use was for- 
bidden throughout all Germany. In Hamburg it was burnt in 
public by order of the Senate. The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th Feb., 
1719, renewed the edict of r685, and not till 1765 was its use openly 
allowed in the Electorate of Saxony. This machine, which shook 
Europe to its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule 
and the power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 
18th century. It enabled a totally inexperienced boy, to set the 
whole loom with all its shuttles in motion, by simply moving a 
rod backwards and forwards, and in its improved form produced 
from 40 to 50 pieces at once. 

About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a 
Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace. Even 
as late as the beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven by 
Water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as it was 
by Parliament, only with great difficulty. No sooner had Everet 
in 1758 erected the first wool-shearing machine that was driven 
by water-power, than it was set on fire by 100,000 people who had 
been thrown out of work. Fifty thousand workpeople, who had 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 429 

previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against 
Arkwright's scribbling mills and carding engines. The enormous 
destruction of machinery that occurred in the English manufac- 
turing districts during the first 15 years of this century, chiefly 
caused by the employment of the power-loom, and known as the 
Luddite movement, gave the anti-jacobin governments of a Sid- 
mouth, aCastlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most reaction- 
ary and forcible measures. It took both time and experience be- 
fore the workpeople learnt to distinguish between machinery and 
its employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not against 
the material instruments of production, but against the mode 
in which they are used. 1 

The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manu- 
facture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. The 
opposition against the establishment of new manufactures, pro- 
ceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the work- 
people. Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat 
the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying 
a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of actually displac- 
ing those in work. This distinction is self-evident. If it be said 
that 100 millions of people would be required in England to spin 
with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with 
mules by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules took 
the place of those millions who never existed. It means only this, 
that many millions of workpeople would be required to replace 
the spinning machinery. If, on the other hand, we say, that in 
England the power-loom threw 800,000 weavers on the streets, 
we do not refer to existing machinery, that would have to be re- 
placed by a definite number of workpeople, but to a number of 
weavers in existence who were actually replaced or displaced by 
the looms. During the manufacturing period, handicraft labour, al- 
tered though it was by division of labour, was yet the basis. The 
demands of the new colonial markets could not be satisfied owing 
to the relatively small number of town operatives handed down 
from the middle ages, and the manufactures proper opened out new 
fields of production to the rural population, driven from the 
land by the dissolution of the feudal system. At that time, 
therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, 
were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made the 



1 In old-fashioned manufactures the revolts of the workpeople against 
machinery, even to this day, occasionally assume a savage character, as 
in the case of the Sheffield file cutters in 1865. 



430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



workpeople more productive. 1 Long before the period of Modern 
Industry, co-operation and the concentration of the instruments 
of labour in the hands of a few, gave rise, in numerous countries 
where these methods were applied in agriculture, to great, sudden 
and forcible revolutions in the modes of production, and conse- 
quentially, in the conditions of existence, and the means of employ- 
ment of the rural populations. But this contest at first takes place 
more between the large and the small landed proprietors, than be- 
tween capital and wage-labour; on the other hand, when the labour- 
ers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, 
&amp;c, in this case force is directly resorted to in the first instance as 
the prelude to the industrial revolution. The labourers are first 
driven from the land, and then come the sheep. Land grabbing 
on a great scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the first 
step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on 
a great scale. 2 Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, at first, 
more the appearance of a political revolution. 

The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a ma- 
chine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself. 8 
The self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is 
thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the work- 
people, whose means of livelihood have been destroyed by that 
machinery. The whole system of capitalist production is based 
on the fact that the workman sells his labour-power as a commodity. 



1 Sir James Steuart also understands machinery quite in this sense. 
"Je considere done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter (virtuelle- 
ment) le nombre des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir. . . . 
En quoi 1'effet d'une machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux habitants?" 
(French trans, t. I., I. I., ch. XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces 
"Polygamy." The above point of view is, at the most, admissible only for 
some parts of the United States. On the other hand, "machinery can seldom 
be used with success to abridge the labour of an individual; more time would 
be lost in its construction than could be saved by its application. It is only 
really useful when it acts on great masses, when a single machine can assist 
the work of thousands. It is accordingly in the most populous countries, 
where there are most idle men, that it is most abundant. ... It is not called 
into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can 
be brought to work in masses." (Piercy Ravenstone: "Thoughts on the 
Funding System and its Effects." London, 1824, p. 45.) 

2 *[Note in the 4th German edition. — This applies to Germany too. 
Where in our country agriculture on a large scale exists, hence particularly in 
the East, it has become possible only in consequence of the clearing of the 
estates ("Bauernlegen"), a practice which became widespread in the 16th 
century and was particularly so since 1648.— F. E.] 

3 "Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, I. c, 
p. 479. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 431 

Division of labour specialises this labour-power, by reducing it 
to skill in handling a particular tool. So soon as the handling of 
this tool becomes the work of a machine, then, with the use-value, 
the exchange-value too, of the workman's labour-power vanishes; 
the workman becomes unsaleable, like paper money thrown out 
of currency by legal enactment. That portion of the working-class, 
thus by machinery rendered superfluous, i. e., no longer immedi- 
ately necessary for the self-expansion of capital, either goes to the 
wall in the unequal contest of the old handicrafts and manufac- 
tures with machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible 
branches of industry, swamps the labour-market, and sinks the 
price of labour-power below its value. It is impressed upon the 
workpeople, as a great consolation, first, that their sufferings are 
only temporary ("a temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that 
machinery acquires the mastery over the whole of a given field 
of production, only by degrees, so that the extent and intensity 
of its destructive effect is diminished. The first consolation neu- 
tralises the second. When machinery seizes on an industry by 
degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives who 
compete with it. Where the transition is rapid, the effect is acute 
and felt by great masses. History discloses no tragedy more horrible 
than the gradual extinction of the English hand-loom weavers, an 
extinction that was spread over several decades, and finally sealed 
in 1838. Many of them died of starvation, many with families vege- 

tated for a long time on2-^d. a day. 1 On the other hand, the 

English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India. 



1 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, 
before the passing of the Poor Law of 1833, was prolonged by supplementing 
the wages, which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with 
parish relief. "The Rev. Mr. Turner was, in 1827, rector of Wilmslow, in Chesh- 
ire, a manufacturing district. The questions of the Committee of Emigration, 
and Mr Turner's answers, show how the competition of human labour is main- 
tained against machinery. 'Question: Has not the use of the power-loom su- 
perseded the use of the hand-loom? Answer: Undoubtedly; it would have 
superseded them much more than it has done, if the hand loom weavers were 
not enabled to submit to a reduction of wages.' 'Question: But in submitting 
he has accepted wages which are insufficient to support him, and looks to 
parochial contribution as the remainder of his support? Answer: Yes, and 
in fact the competition between the hand-loom and the power-loom is main- 
tained out of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is 
the benefit which the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery, 
to be reduced from the respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, 
to the cringing wretch who lives on the debasing bread of charity. This they 
call a temporary inconvenience." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits 
of Competition and Co-operation." Loud., 1834, p 29.) 



432 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



The Governor General reported 1834-35: "The misery hardly 
finds a parallel in the history of commerce. The bones of the cotton- 
weavers are bleaching the plains of India." No doubt, in turning 
them out of this "temporal" world, the machinery caused them no 
more than "a temporary inconvenience." For the rest, since machin- 
ery is continually seizing upon new fields of production, its tem- 
porary effect is really permanent. Hence, the character of inde- 
pendence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and to the prod- 
uct, as against the workman, is developed by means of machinery 
into a thorough antagonism. * Therefore, it is with the advent of 
machinery, that the workman for the first time brutally revolts 
against the instruments of labour. 

The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. This 
direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, 
whenever newly introduced machinery competes with handi- 
crafts or manufactures, handed down from former times. But 
even in Modern Industry the continual improvement of machin- 
ery, and the development of the automatic system, has an anal- 
ogous effect. "The object of improved machinery is to diminish 
manual labour, to provide for the performance of a process or 
the completion of a link in a manufacture by the aid of an iron 
instead of the human apparatus." 2 "The adaptation of power to ma- 
chinery heretofore moved by hand, is almost of daily occurrence. . . 
the minor improvements in machinery having for their object 
economy of power, the production of better work, the turning off 
more work in the same time, or in supplying the place of a child, a 
female, or a man, are constant, and although sometimes apparently 
of no great moment, have somewhat important results." 3 "Whenever 
a process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is 
withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the cunning workman, 
who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed 
in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a 



1 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" 
(i.e., as Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords and 
capitalists, whose wealth, from the economic point of view, forms the 
Wealth of the Nation), "may at the same time render the population redundant 
and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) "The 
constant aim and the tendency of every improvement in machinery is, in fact, 
to do away entirely with the labour of man, or to lessen its price by substi- 
tuting the labour of women and children for that of grown-up men, or of un- 
skilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure, 1. c, t. I., p. v 35.) 

2 "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. 43. 
* "Rep. Insp. Fact, for 31st October, 1856," p. 15, 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 433 

child can superintend it." 1 "On the automatic plan skilled la- 
bour gets progressively superseded". 2 "The effect of improve- 
ments in machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for 
the employment of the same quantity of adult labour as before, 
in order to produce a given result, but in substituting one descrip- 
tion of human labour for another, the less skilled for the more 
skilled, juvenile for adult, female for male, causes a fresh disturb- 
ance in the rate of wages." 3 "The effect of substituting the self- 
acting mule for the common mule, is to discharge the greater part 
of the men spinners, and to retain adolescents and children." 4 
The extraordinary power of expansion of the factory system 
owing to accumulated practical experience, to the mechanical 
means at hand, and to constant technical progress, was proved to 
us by the giant strides of that system under the pressure of a short- 
ened working-day. But who, in 1860, the Zenith year of the Eng- 
lish cotton industry, would have dreamt of the galloping im- 
provements in machinery, and the corresponding displacement of 
working people, called into being during the following 3 years, 
under the stimulus of the American Civil War? A couple of exam- 
ples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice 
on this point. A Manchester manufacturer states: "We formerly 
had 75 carding engines, now we have 12, doing the same quantity 
of work. . . We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving in 
wages of £10 a-week. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10% 
in the quantity of cotton consumed." "In another fine-spinning 
mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed 
and the adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduction had 
been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, and of 
above half in another, and that the introduction of the combing 



1 Ure, 1. c, p. 19. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in 
brick-making consists in this, that the employer is made entirely independent 
of skilled labourers." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Report," Lond., 1866, p. 130, 
n. 46.) Mr. A. Sturrock, superintendent of the machine department of the 
Great Northern Railway, says, with regard to the building of locomotives, 
&amp;c: "Expensive English workmen are being less used every day. The pro- 
duction of the workshops of England is being increased by the use of improved 
tools and these tools are again served by a low class of labour. . . Formerly 
their skilled labour necessarily produced all the parts of engines. Now the 
parts of engines are produced by labour with less skill, but with good tools. 
By tools, I mean engineer's machinery, lathes, planing machines, drills, and 
so on." ("Royal Com. on Railways," Lond., 1867, Minutes of Evidence, n. 
17, 862 and 17, 863.) 

2 Ure, I. c, p. 20. 
* Ure, 1. c, p. 321. 
4 Ure, 1. c, p. 23. 



434 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



machine in place of the second carding, had considerably reduced 
the number of hands formerly employed in the carding-room." 
Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour 
of 10%. The Messrs. Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, state: "In 
our blowing-room department we consider our expense with new 
machinery is fully one-third less in wages and hands... in the jack- 
frame and drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, 
and likewise one-third less in hands; in the spinning-room about 
one-third less in expenses. But this is not all; when our yarn goes 
to the manufacturers, it is so much better by the application of 
our new machinery, that they will produce a greater quantity of 
cloth, and cheaper than from the yarn produced by old machin- 
ery." 1 Mr. Redgrave further remarks in the same Report: "The 
reduction of hands against increased production is, in fact, con- 
stantly taking place; in woollen mills the reduction commenced 
some time since, and is continuing; a few days since, the master 
of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the 
great falling off in the girls' school is not only caused by the dis- 
tress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in con- 
sequence of which a reduction of 70 short-timers had taken place." 2 
The following table shows the total result of the mechanical 
improvements in the English cotton industry due to the Ameri- 
can Civil War. 

NUMBER OF FACTORIES. 



England and Wales . . . 

Scotland 

Ireland 


1858 

. 2,046 

152 

12 


1861 

2,715 

163 

9 


1868 

2,405 

131 

13 






United Kingdom . . 


. 2,210 


2,887 


2,549 



1 "Rep. Insp Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," pp. 108, 109. 

2 1. c, p. 109. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, 
allowed the English manufacturers, immediately after the termination of the 
American Civil War, and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world 
again. Cloth, during the last six months of 1866, was almost unsaleable. There- 
upon began the consignment of goods to India and China, thus naturally 
making the glut more intense. At the beginning of 1867 the manufacturers 
resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, viz., reducing wages 5 per 
cent. The workpeople resisted, and said that the only remedy was to work 
short time, 4 days a-week; and their theory was the correct one. After holding 
out for some time, the self-elected captains of industry had to make up their 
minds to short time, with reduced wages in some places, and in others without. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 435 



NUMBER OF POWER-LOOMS. 



1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 275,590 368,125 344,719 

Scotland 21,624 30,110 31,864 

Ireland 1,633 1,757 2,746 



United Kingdom .... 298,847 399,992 379,329 



NUMBER OF SPINDLES. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 25,818,576 28,352,152 30,478,228 

Scotland 2,041,129 1,915,398 1,397,546 

Ireland 150,512 119,944 124,240 



United Kingdom .... 28,010,217 30,387,494 32,000,014 



NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 341,170 407,593 357,052 

Scotland 34,698 41,237 39,809 

Ireland 3,345 2,734 4,203 



United Kingdom .... 379,213 451,569 401,064 



Hence, between 1861 and 1868, 338 cotton factories disap- 
peared, in other words more productive machinery on a larger 
scale was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of cap- 
italists. The number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but 
since their product increased in the same period, an improved 
loom must have yielded more than an old one. Lastly the number 
of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the number of opera- 
tives decreased by 50,505 The" temporary" misery, inflicted on the 
workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was heightened, and from being 
temporary made permanent, by the rapid and persistent progress 
of machinery. 

But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better 
of the workman, and is constantly on the point of making him 
superfluous. It is also a power inimical to him, and as such capi- 
tal proclaims it from the roof tops and as such makes use of it. 
It is the most powerful weapon for repressing strikes, those peri- 
odical revolts of the wo.'king-class against the autocracy of 



436 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

capital. 1 According to Gaskell, the steam-engine was from the very 
first an antagonist of human power, an antagonist that enabled 
the capitalist to tread under foot the growing claims of the work- 
men, who threatened the newly born factory system with a cri- 
sis. 2 It would be possible to write quite a history of the inventions, 
made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying capital with 
weapons against the revolts of the working-class. At the head of 
these in importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it 
opened up a new epoch in the automatic system. s 

Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gives the fol- 
lowing evidence before the Trades' Union Commission, with re- 
gard to the improvements made by him in machinery and intro- 
duced in consequence of the wide-spread and long strikes of the 
engineers in 1851. "The characteristic feature of our modern me- 
chanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool ma- 
chinery. What every mechanical workman has now to do, and what 
every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the 
beautiful labour of the machine. The whole class of workmen that 
depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with. 
Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic. Thanks 
to these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number 
of grown-up men from 1,500 to 750. The result was a considerable 
increase in my profits." 

Ure says of a machine used in calico printing: "At length 
capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage" 
[namely the, in their eyes, burdensome terms of their contracts 
with the workmen] "in the resources of science, and were speedi- 
ly re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of the head over the 
inferior members." Speaking of an invention for dressing warps: 
"Then the combined malcontents, who fancied themselves impreg- 
nably intrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, 
found their flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by 
the new mechanical tactics, and were obliged to surrender at dis- 
cretion." With regard to the invention of the self-acting mule, 

1 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades 
amounts to a chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture of 
pressed glass, in which the chief operations are done by machinery. One 
firm in Newcastle, who formerly produced 350,000 lbs. of blown-flint glass, 
now produces in its place 3,000,500 lbs. of pressed glass. ("Ch. Empl. Comm., 
Fourth Rep.," 1865, pp. 262-263). 

2 Gaskell. "The Manufacturing Population of England," London, 1833, 
pp. 3, 4. 

3 W. Fairbairn discovered several very important 'applications of ma- 
chinery to the construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his 
own workshops. 



MACHINE RY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 437 

he says: "A creation destined to restore order among the indus- 
trious classes. ... This invention confirms the great doctrine already 
propounded, that when capital enlists science into her service, the 
refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility." ' Although 
Ure's work appeared 30 years ago, at a time when the factory 
system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly 
expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its undisguised 
cynicism, but also by the naivete with which it blurts out the 
stupid contradictions of the capitalist brain. For instance, after 
propounding the "doctrine" stated above, that capital, with the 
aid of science taken into its pay, always reduces the refractory 
hand of labour to docility, he grows indignant because "it(physico- 
mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to the rich 
capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor." After preach- 
ing a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid develop- 
ment of machinery is to the working-classes, he warns them, that by 
their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development. 
"Violent revulsions of this nature," he says, "display short- 
sighted man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor." 
A few pages before he states the contrary. "Had it not been for the 
violent collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous 
views among the factory operatives, the factory system would 
have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all 
concerned." Then he exclaims again: "Fortunately for the state 
of society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the improve- 
ments in machinery are gradual." "It" (improvement in machin- 
ery) "is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults by displac- 
ing a portion of them, and thus rendering their number super- 
abundant as compared with the demand for their labour. It 
certainly augments the demand for the labour of children and 
increases the rate of their wages." On the other hand, this same 
dispenser of consolation defends the lowness of the children's 
wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their 
children at too early an age into the factory. The whole of his book 
is a vindication of a working-day of unrestricted length; that 
Parliament should forbid children of 13 years to be exhausted by 
working 12 hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the darkest 
days of the middle ages. This does not prevent him from calling 
upon the factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means 
of machinery has given them the leisure to think of their "immor- 
tal interests." 2 

1 Ure, 1. c, pp. 368-370. 

2 Ure, 1. c, pp. 368, 7, 370, 280, 281, 321, 370, 475. 



438 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 6.— THE THEORY OF COMPENSATION AS REGARDS 
THE WORKPEOPLE DISPLACED BY MACHINERY 

James Mill, MacGulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, 
and a whole series besides, of bourgeois political economists, 
insist that all machinery that displaces workmen, simultaneous- 
ly and necessarily sets free an amount of capital adequate to em- 
ploy the same identical workmen. x 

Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at £30 a year 
each, in a carpet factory. The variable capital annually laid out 
amounts, therefore, to £3,000. Suppose, also, that he discharges 
50 of his workmen, and employs the remaining 50 with machinery 
that costs him £1,500. To simplify matters, we take no account of 
buildings, coal, &amp;c. Further suppose that the raw material annual- 
ly consumed costs £3,000, both before and after the change. 2 Is 
any capital set free by this metamorphosis? Before the change, the 
total sum of £6,000 consisted half of constant, and half of variable 
capital. After the change it consists of £4,500 constant (£3,000 raw 
material and £1,500 machinery), and £1,500 variable capital. The 
variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of 
the total capital. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is 
here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged against 
labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital. 
Other things remaining unchanged, the capital of £6,000, can, in 
future, employ no more than 50 men. With each improvement in 
the machinery, it will employ fewer. If the newly introduced ma- 
chinery had cost less than did the labour-power and implements 
displaced by it, if, for instance, instead of costing £1,500, it had 
cost only £1,000, a variable capital of £1,000 would have been 
converted into constant capital, and locked up; and a capital of 
£500 would have been set free. The latter sum, supposing wages 
unchanged, would form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out 
of the 50 men discharged; nay, less than 16, for, in order to be em- 
ployed as capital, a part of this £500 must now become constant 
capital, thus leaving only the remainder to be laid out in labour- 
power. 

But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machin- 
ery affords employment to a greater number of mechanics, can 



1 Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly 
disclaimed it, with the scientific impartiality and love of truth character- 
istic of him. See 1. c, ch. xxxi. "On Machinery." 

2 Nota bene. My illustration is entirely on the lines of those given by 
the above named economists. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 439 

that be called compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the 
streets? At the best, its construction employs fewer men than its 
employment displaces. The sum of £1,500 that formerly represent- 
ed the wages of the discharged carpet-makers, now represents in 
the shape of machinery: (1) the value of the means of production 
used in the construction of that machinery, (2) the wages of the me- 
chanics employed in its construction, and (3) the surplus-value 
falling to the share of their "master." Further, the machinery need 
not be renewed till it is worn out. Hence, in order to keep the in- 
creased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet 
manufacturer after another must displace workmen by machines. 

As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of 
setting free. They have in their minds the means of subsistence 
of the liberated workpeople. It cannot be denied, in the above 
instance, that the machinery not only liberates 50 men, thus plac- 
ing them at others' disposal, but, at the same time, it withdraws 
from their consumption, and sets free, means of subsistence to 
the value of £1,500. The simple fact, by no means a new one, 
that machinery cuts off the workmen from their means of subsist- 
ence is, therefore, in economic parlance tantamount to this, that 
machinery liberates means of subsistence for the workman, or 
converts those means into capital for his employment. The mode 
of expression, you see, is everything. Nominibus mollire licet 
mala. 

This theory implies that the £1,500 worth of means of sub- 
sistence was capital that was being expanded by the labour of 
the 50 men discharged. That, consequently, this capital falls 
out of employment so soon as they commence their forced holi- 
days, and never rests till it has found a fresh investment, where 
it can again be productively consumed by these same 50 men. 
That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen must 
come together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete. 
That the sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are 
therefore as transient as are the riches of this world. 

In relation to the discharged workmen, the £1,500 worth of 
means of subsistence never was capital. What really confronted 
them as capital, was the sum of £1,500, afterwards laid out in 
machinery. On looking closer it will be seen that this sum repre- 
sented part of the carpets produced in a year by the 50 discharged 
men, which part they received as wages from their employer in 
money instead of in kind. With the carpets in the form of money, 
they bought means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. These 
means, therefore, were to them, not capital, but commodities. 



440 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



and they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, 
but buyers. The circumstance that they were "freed" by the ma- 
chinery, from the means of purchase, changed them from buyers 
into non-buyers. Hence a lessened demand for those commodi- 
ties— voila tout. If this diminution be not compensated by an 
increase from some other quarter, the market price of the commodi- 
ties falls. If this state of things lasts for some time, and extends, 
there follows a discharge of workmen employed in the production 
of these commodities. Some of the capital that was previously de- 
voted to production of necessary means of subsistence, has to be- 
come reproduced in another form. While prices fall, and capital 
is being displaced, the labourers employed in the production of nec- 
essary means of subsistence are in their turn "freed" from a part 
of their wages. Instead, therefore, of proving that, when machinery 
frees the workman from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously 
converts those means into capital for his further employment, our 
apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of supply and demand, 
prove, on the contrary, that machinery throws workmen on the 
streets, not only in that branch of production in which it is in- 
troduced, but also in those branches in which it is not introduced. 
The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of econ- 
omists, are as follows: The labourers, when driven out of the 
workshop by the machinery, are thrown upon the labour-market, 
and there add to the number of workmen at the disposal of the 
capitalists. In Part VII. of this book it will be seen that this effect 
of machinery, which, as we have seen, is represented to be a com- 
pensation to the working-class, is on the contrary a most frightful 
scourge. For the present I will only say this: The labourers that 
are thrown out of work in any branch of industry, can no doubt 
seek for employment in some other branch. If they find it, and 
thus renew the bond between them and the means of subsistence, 
this takes place only by the intermediary of a new and additional 
capital that is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary 
of the capital that formerly employed them and was afterwards 
converted into machinery. And even should they find employment, 
what a poor look-out is theirs! Crippled as they are by division 
of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their old 
trade, that they cannot find admission into any industries, except 
a few of inferior kind, that are over-supplied with underpaid work- 
men. x Further, every branch of industry attracts each year a new 

1 A disciple of Ricardo, in answer to the insipidities of J. B. Say, re- 
marks on this point: "Where division of labour is well developed, the skill of 
the labourer is available only in that particular branch in which it has been 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 441 

stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up 
vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. So soon as machin- 
ery sets free a part of the workmen employed in a given branch of 
industry, the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of 
employment, and become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile 
the original victims, during the period of transition, for the most 
part starve and perish. 

It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not re- 
sponsible for "setting free" the workman from the means of sub- 
sistence. It cheapens and increases production in that branch 
which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the mass of 
the means of subsistence produced in other branches. Hence, aft- 
er its introduction, the society possesses as much, if not more, of 
the necessaries of life than before, for the labourers thrown out 
of work; and that quite apart from the enormous share of the annual 
produce wasted by the non-workers. And this is the point relied 
on by our apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms insep- 
arable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist, 
they say, since they do not arise out of machinery, as such, but 
out of its capitalist employment! Since therefore machinery, con- 
sidered alone, shortens the hours of labour, but, when in the serv- 
ice of capital, lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, 
but when employed by capital, heightens the intensity of labour; 
since in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of Nature, but in 
the hands of capital, makes man the slave of those forces; since 
in itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in the hands 
of capital, makes them paupers — for all these reasons and others 
besides, says the bourgeois economist without more ado, it is 
clear as noon-day that all these contradictions are a mere semblance 
of the reality, and that, as a matter of fact, they have neither an 
actual nor a theoretical existence. Thus he saves himself from all 
further puzzling of the brain, and what is more, implicitly de- 
clares his opponent to be stupid enough to contend against, not 
the capitalistic employment of machinery, but machinery itself. 

No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconveni- 
ence may result from the capitalist use of machinery. But where 
is the medal without its reverse! Any employment of machinery, 



acquired; he himself is a sort of machine. It does not therefore help matters 
one jot, to repeat in parrot fashion, that things have a tendency to find their 
level. On looking around us we cannot but see, that they are unable to find 
their level for a long time; and that when they do find it, the level is always 
lower than at the commencement of the process." ("An Inquiry into those 
Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand," &amp;c. Lond. 1821, p. 72.) 



442 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



except by capital, is to him an impossibility. Exploitation of 
the workman by the machine is therefore, with him, identical 
with exploitation of the machine by the workman. Whoever, 
therefore, exposes the real state of things in the capitalistic em- 
ployment of machinery, is against its employment in any way, 
and is an enemy of social progress! 1 Exactly the reasoning of the 
celebrated Bill Sykes. "Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the 
throat of this commercial traveller has been cut. But that is not 
my fault, it is the fault of the knife. Must we, for such a tempo- 
rary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife? Only consider! 
where would agriculture and trade be without the knife? Is it not 
as salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy? And in addi- 
tion a willing help at the festive board? If you abolish the knife — 
you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism." 2 

Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in 
those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, not- 
withstanding this, bring about an increase of employment in 
other industries. This effect, however, has nothing in common 
with the so-called theory of compensation. Since every article 
produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article produced 
by hand, we deduce the following infallible law: If the total 
quantity of the article produced by machinery, be equal to the to- 
tal quantity of the article previously produced by a handicraft 
or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, then the total 
labour expended is diminished. The new labour spent on the in- 
struments of labour, on the machinery, on the coal, and so on, 
must necessarily be less than the labour displaced by the use of 
the machinery; otherwise the product of the machine would be as 
dear, or dearer, than the product of the manual labour. But, as 
a matter of fact, the total quantity of the article produced by ma- 
chinery with a diminished number of workmen, instead of remain- 
ing equal to, by far exceeds the total quantity of the hand-made 
article that has been displaced. Suppose that 400,000 yards of 

1 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretentious cret- 
inism. "If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of 8 years, "if it be 
advantageous, to develop the skill of the workman more and more, so that 
he is capable of producing, with the same or with a less quantity of labour, a 
constantly increasing quantity of commodities, it must also be advantageous, 
that he should avail himself of the help of such machinery as will assist him 
most effectively in the attainment of this result." (MacCulloch: "Princ. of 
Pol. Econ.," Lond. 1830, p. 166.) 

2 "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, how- 
ever, that touches us but little." A. Thiers: De la propriete. — M. Thiers 
here confounds the spinning machine with the power-loom, "a fact, however, 
that touches us but little." 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 443 

cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer weavers than 
could weave 100,000 yards by hand. In the quadrupled product 
there lies four times as much raw material. Hence the production 
of raw material must be quadrupled. But as regards the instru- 
ments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on, 
it is different; the limit up to which the additional labour re- 
quired for their production can increase, varies with the differ- 
ence between the quantity of the machine-made article, and the 
quantity of the same article that the same number of workmen 
could make by hand. 

Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, 
the immediate effect is to increase production in the other in- 
dustries that furnish the first with means of production. How 
far employment is thereby found for an increased number of 
men, depends, given the length of the working-day and the in- 
tensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, 
i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its variable component. This 
ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which 
machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those 
trades. The number of the men condemned to work in coal and 
metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress of the 
English factory system; but during the last few decades this in- 
crease of number has been less rapid, owing to the use of new ma- 
chinery in mining. 1 Anew type of workman springs into life along 
with the machine, namely, its maker. We have already learnt that 
machinery has possessed itself even of this branch of production 
on a scale that grows greater every day. 2 As to raw material, 3 
there is not the least doubt that the rapid strides of cotton spinning, 
not only pushed on with tropical luxuriance the growth of cotton 



1 According to the census of 1861 (Vol. II., Lond., 1863), the number of 
people employed in coalmines in England and Wales, amounted to 246,613 
of which 73,545 were under, and 173,067 were over 20 years. Of those under 
20,835 were between 5 and 10 years, 30,701 between 10 and 15 years, 42,010 
between 15 and 19 years. The number employed in iron, copper, lead, tin, 
and other mines of every description, was 319,222. 

2 In England and Wales, in 1861, there were employed in making ma- 
chinery, 60,807 persons, including the masters and their clerks, &amp;c, also 
all agents and business people connected with this industry, but excluding 
the makers of small machines, such as sewing-machines, &amp;.C., as also the 
makers of the operative parts of machines, such as spindles. The total num- 
ber of civil engineers amounted to 3,329. 

8 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials, let me here state 
that, in 1861, there were in England and Wales 125,771 operative iron foun- 
ders, of whom 123,430 were males, 2,341 females. Of the former 30,810 were 
under, and 92,620 over 20 years. 



444 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

in the United States, and with it the African slave trade, but also 
made the breeding of slaves the chief business of the border slave- 
states. When, in 1790, the first census of slaves was taken in the 
United States, their number was 697,000; in 1861 it had nearly 
reached four millions. On the other hand, it is no less certain that 
the rise of the English woollen factories, together with the grad- 
ual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, brought about 
the superfluity of agricultural labourers that led to their being 
driven in masses into the towns. Ireland, having during the last 
twenty years reduced its population by nearly one half, is at this 
moment undergoing the process of still further reducing the num- 
ber of its inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of 
its landlords and of the English woollen manufacturers. 

When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or 
intermediate stages through which the subject of labour has 
to pass on its way to completion, there is an increased yield of 
material in those stages, and simultaneously an increased de- 
mand for labour in the handicrafts or manufactures supplied 
by the produce of the machines. Spinning by machinery, for 
example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the 
hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time with- 
out increased outlay. Their earnings accordingly rose. x Hence 
a flow of people into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length 
the 800,000 weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the 
throstle and the mule, were overwhelmed by the power-loom. 
So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced 
by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needle- 
women, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing- 
machine. 

In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively 
small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw mate- 
rials, intermediate products, instruments of labour, &amp;c, the work- 
ing-up of these raw materials and intermediate products becomes 
split up into numberless branches; social production increases 
in diversity. The factory system carries the social division of la- 
bour immeasurably further than does manufacture, for it in- 
creases the productiveness of the industries it seizes upon, in a 
far higher degree. 



1 "A family of four grown-up persons, with two children as winders, 
earned at the end of the last, and the beginning of the present century, by ten 
hours' daily labour, £4 a week. If the work was very pressing, they could 
earn more. . . . Before that, they had always suffered from a deficient supply 
of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. c, pp. 25-27.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 445 

The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus- 
value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is em- 
bodied. And, as the substances consumed by the capitalists and 
their dependants become more plentiful, so too do these orders 
of society. Their growing wealth, and the relatively diminished 
number of workmen required to produce the necessaries of life 
beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and luxurious wants, 
the means of satisfying those wants. A larger portion of the prod- 
uce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger part 
of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a multi- 
plicity of refined shapes. In other words, the production of luxu- 
ries increases. * The refined and varied forms of the products are 
also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations 
that are created by Modern Industry. Not only are greater quanti- 
ties of foreign articles of luxury exchanged for home products, but 
a greater mass of foreign raw materials, ingredients, and inter- 
mediate products, are used as means of production in the home 
industries. Owing to these relations with the markets of the world, 
the demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which 
split up into numerous varieties. 2 

The increase of the means of production and subsistence, 
accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of labourers, 
causes an increased demand for labour in making canals, rocks, 
tunnels, bridges, and so on, works that can only bear fruit in the 
far future. Entirely new branches of production, creating new 
fields of labour, are also formed, as the direct result either of ma- 
chinery or of the general industrial changes brought about by it. 
But the place occupied by these branches in the general production 
is, even in the most developed countries, far from important. The 
number of labourers that find employment in them is directly 
proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for the 
crudest form of manual labour. The chief industries of this kind 
are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam nav- 
igation, and railways. According to the census of 1861 for England 
and Wales, we find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of 
mechanical apparatus, servants of the gas companies, &amp;c), 15,211 
persons; in telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; steam 
navigation, 3,570; and in railways, 70,599, of whom the unskilled 



1 F. Engels in "Lage, &amp;.C.," points out the miserable condition of a large 
number of those who work on these very articles of luxury. See also numerous 
Instances in the "Reports of the Children's Employment Commission." 

2 In 1861, in England and Wales, there were 94,665 sailors in the 
merchant service. 



446 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



"navvies," more or less permanently employed, and the whole 
administrative and commercial staff, make up about 28,000. The 
total number of persons, therefore, employed in these five new 
industries amounts to 94,145. 

Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern indus- 
try, accompanied as it is by both a more extensive and a more 
intense exploitation of labour-power in all other spheres of pro- 
duction, allows of the unproductive employment of a larger and 
larger part of the working-class, and the consequent reproduction, 
on a constantly extending scale, of the ancient domestic slaves 
under the name of a servant class, including men-servants, wom- 
en-servants, lackeys, &amp;c. According to the census of 1861, the pop- 
ulation of England and Wales was 20,066,244; of these, 9,776,259 
males, and 10,289,965 females. If we deduct from this population 
all who are too old or too young for work, all unproductive women, 
young persons and children, the "ideological" classes, such as gov- 
ernment officials, priests, lawyers, soldiers, &amp;c; further, all who 
have no occupation but to consume the labour of others in 
the form of rent, interest, &amp;c; and, lastly, paupers, vagabonds, 
and criminals, there remain in round numbers eight millions of 
the two sexes of every age, including in that number every capi- 
talist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce, or finance. 
Among these 8 millions are: 

PERSONS, 
Agricultural labourers (including shep- 
herds, farm servants, and maidservants 
living in the houses of farmers), . . . 1,098,261 

All who are employed in cotton, woollen, 
worsted, flax, hemp, silk, and jute fac- 
tories, in stocking making and lace 
making by machinery, 642,607* 

All who are employed in coal mines and 

metal mines, 565,835 

All who are employed in metal works 
(blast-furnaces, rolling mills, &amp;c), and 
metal manufactures of every kind, . 396, 998 2 

The servant class, 1,208,648 8 



1 Of these only 177,596 are males above 13 years of age. 

15 Of these, 30,501 are females. 

8 Of these, 137,447 males. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do 
not serve in private houses. Between 1861 and 1870 the number of male 
servants nearly doubled itself. It increased to 267,671. In the year 1847 there 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 447 

All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, 
taken together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile 
factories and metal industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; 
in both cases less than the number of modern domestic slaves. 
What a splendid result of the capitalist exploitation of machinery! 

SECTION 7.— REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OF WORKPEOPLE 
BY THE FACTORY SYSTEM. CRISES IN THE COTTON TRADE 

All political economists of any standing admit that the in- 
troduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen 
in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which this ma- 
chinery at first competes. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery 
of the factory operative. And what is the great trump-card that 
they play? That machinery, after the horrors of the period of 
introduction and development have subsided, instead of dimin- 
ishing, in the long run increases the number of the slaves of labour! 
Yes, Political Economy revels in the hideous theory, hideous to 
every "philanthropist" who believes in the eternal Nature-ordained 
necessity for capitalist production, that after a period of growth 
and transition, even its crowning success, the factory system based 
on machinery, grinds down more workpeople than on its first in- 
troduction it throws on the streets. 1 



were 2,694 gamekeepers (for the landlords' preserves), in 1869 there were 
4,921. The young servant girls in the houses of the London lower middle class 
are in common parlance called "slaveys." 

1 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system 
to be an absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an increased 
number of "gens honnetes" live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite 
perfectible." Little as he understands the movement of production, at least 
he feels, that machinery must needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduc- 
tion converts busy workmen into paupers, and its development calls more 
slaves of labour into existence than it has suppressed. It is not possible to 
bring out the cretinism of his standpoint, except by his own words: "Les 
classes condamnees a produire et a consommer diminuent, et les classes qui 
dirigent le travail, qui soulagent, consolent, et eclairent toute la population, 
se multiplient . . . et s'approprient tous les bienfaits qui resultent de la 
diminution des frais du travail, de l'abondance des productions, et du bon 
marche des consommations. Dans cette direction, l'espece humaine s'eleve 
aux plus hautes conceptions du genie, penetre dans les profondeurs myste- 
rieuses de la religion, etablit les principes salutaires de la morale (which 
consists in 's'approprier tous les bienfaits,' &amp;c), les lois tutelaires de la li- 
berte (liberty of 'les classes condamnees a produire?') et du pouvoir, de l'obe- 
issance et de la justice, du devoir et de l'humanite." For this twaddle see 
"Des Systemes d'Economie Politique. &amp;.c, Par M. Ch. Ganilh," 2eme ed., 
Paris, 1821, t. I, p. 224, and see p. 212. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of 
English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension 
of the factory system may, at a certain stage of its develop- 
ment, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an absolute 
decrease in the number of operatives employed. In the year 1860, 
when a special census of all the factories in the United Kingdom 
was taken by order of Parliament, the factories in those parts of 
Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire, included in the district of 
Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered 652; 570 of these con- 
tained 85,622 power-looms, 6,819,146 spindles (exclusive of dou- 
bling spindles), employed 27,439 horse-power (steam), and 1,390 
(water), and 94,119 persons. In the year 1865, the same factories 
contained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a steam-power of 
28,925 horses, and a water-power of 1,445 horses, and employed 
88,913 persons. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase 
in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%, and in engine-power 3%, 

while the number of persons employed decreased 5-^-%. 1 Between 

1852 and 1862, considerable extension of the English woollen 
manufacture took place, while the number of hands employed in 
it remained almost stationary, showing how greatly the introduc- 
tion of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding 
periods. 2 In certain cases, the increase in the number of hands 
employed is only apparent; that is, it is not due to the extension 
of the factories already established, but to the gradual annexation 
of connected trades; for instance, the increase in power-looms, 
and in the hands employed by them between 1838 and 1856, was, 
in the cotton trade, simply owing to the extension of this branch 
of industry; but in the other trades to the application of steam- 
power to the carpet-loom, to the ribbon-loom, and to the linen- 



1 "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1865," p. 58, sq. At the same time, 
however, means of employment for an increased number of hands was ready 
in 110 new mills with 11,625 looms, 628,576 spindles and 2,695 total horse- 
power of steam and water (1. c). 

2 "Reports, &amp;c, for 31 Oct., 1862," p. 79. At the end of 1871, Mr. A. 
Redgrave, the factory inspector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the New 
Mechanics' Institution, said: "What has struck me for some time past is the 
altered appearance of the woollen factories. Formerly they were filled with 
women and children, now machinery seems to do all the work. At my asking 
for an explanation of this from a manufacturer, he gave me the following: 
'Under the old system I employed 63 persons; after the introduction of im- 
proved machinery I reduced my hands to 33, and lately, in consequence of 
new and extensive alterations. I have been in a position to reduce those 33 
to 13."? 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 449 

loom, which previously had been worked by the power of men. * 
Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades was merely 
a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed. Final- 
ly, we have considered this question entirely apart from the fact, 
that everywhere, except in the metal industries, young persons 
(under 18), and women and children form the preponderating ele- 
ment in the class of factory hands. 

Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually dis- 
placed and virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand 
how the factory operatives, through the building of more mills 
and the extension of old ones in a given industry, may become 
more numerous than the manufacturing workmen and handicrafts- 
men that have been displaced. Suppose, for example, that in 
the old mode of production, a capital of £500 is employed weekly, 
two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.e., 
£200 being laid out in means of production, and £300, say £1 per 
man, in labour-power. On the introduction of machinery the com- 
position of this capital becomes altered. We will suppose it to 
consist of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means 
that only £100 is now laid out in labour-power. Consequently, 
two-thirds of the workmen are discharged. If now the business 
extends, and the total capital employed grows to £1,500 under un- 
changed conditions, the number of operatives employed will in- 
crease to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the ma- 
chinery. If the capital further grows to £2,000, 400 men will be em- 
ployed, or one-third more than under the old system. Their numbers 
have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but relatively, i.e., in pro- 
portion to the total capital advanced, they have diminished by 
800, for the £2,000 capital would, in the old state of things, have 
employed 1,200 instead of 400 men. Hence, a relative decrease in 
the number of hands is consistent with an actual increase. We 
assumed above that while the total capital increases, its composi- 
tion remains the same, because the conditions of production re- 
main constant. But we have already seen that, with every ad- 
vance in the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, 
that part which consists of machinery, raw material, &amp;c, increases, 
while the variable component, the part laid out in labour-pow- 
er, decreases. We also know that in no other system of produc- 
tion is improvement so continuous, and the composition of the 
capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory system. 
These changes are, however, continually interrupted by periods 



1 See "Reports, &amp;c, 31 Oct., 1856," p. 16. 



450 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative extension of 
the factories on the existing technical basis. During such periods 
the operatives increase in number. Thus, in 1835, the total number 
of operatives in the cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, and silk facto- 
ries of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while in 1861 the 
number of the power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and of all 
ages, from eight years upwards), amounted to 230,654. Certainly, 
this growth appears less important when we consider that in 1838 
the hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000, 1 
not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the 
Continent of Europe. 

In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I 
shall refer to some actually existing relations, the existence of 
which our theoretical investigation has not yet disclosed. 

So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system 
extends itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manu- 
facture, the result is as sure as is the result of an encounter be- 
tween an army furnished with breach-loaders, and one armed with 
bows and arrows. This first period, during which machinery con- 
quers its field of action, is of decisive importance owing to the ex- 
traordinary profits that it helps to produce. These profits not only 
form a source of accelerated accumulation, but also attract into 
the favoured sphere of production a large part of the additional 
social capital that is being constantly created, and is ever on the 
look-out for new investments. The special advantages of this first 
period of fast and furious activity are felt in every branch of pro- 
duction that machinery invades. So soon, however, as the factory 
system has gained a certain breadth of footing and a definite 
degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical ba- 
sis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery; so soon as coal 
mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the means 
of transport have been revolutionised; so soon, in short, as the 
general conditions requisite for production by the modern indus- 
trial system have been established, this mode of production ac- 
quires an elasticity, a capacity for sudden extension by leaps and 
bounds that finds no hindrance except in the supply of raw mate- 



1 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an in- 
quiry by a Royal Commission, but although their distress was acknowledged 
and lamented, the amelioration of their condition was left, and probably 
necessarily so, to the chances and changes of time, which it may now be hoped" 
[20 years later!] "have nearly obliterated those miseries, and not improbably 
by the present great extension of the power-loom." ("Rep. Insp. of Fact., 
31 Oct., 1856," p. 15.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 451 

rial and in the disposal of the produce. On the one hand, the imme- 
diate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw mate- 
rial in the same way, for example, as the cotton gin augmented 
the production of cotton. 1 On the other hand, the cheapness of 
the articles produced by machinery, and the improved means of 
transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering 
foreign markets. By ruining handicraft production in other coun- 
tries, machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of 
its raw material. In this way East India was compelled to pro- 
duce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain. 2 
By constantly making a part of the hands "supernumerary," mod- 
ern industry, in all countries where it has taken root, gives 
a spur to emigration and to the colonisation of foreign lands, 
which are thereby converted into settlements for growing the raw 
material of the mother country; just as Australia, for example, was 
converted into a colony for growing wool. 8 A new and internation- 
al division of labour, a division suited to the requirements of the 
chief centres of modern industry springs up, and converts one part 
of the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production, for sup- 
plying the other part which remains a chiefly industrial field. This 
revolution hangs together with radical changes in agriculture 
which we need not here further inquire into. 4 

On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons or- 
dered, on the 17th February, 1867, a return of the total quanti- 
ties of grain, corn, and flour, of all sorts, imported into, and 
exported from, the United Kingdom, between the years 1831 and 
1866. I give below a summary of the result. The flour is given in 
quarters of corn. 



1 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw material 
will be mentioned in the third book. 

2 EXPORT OF COTTON FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 
1846.-34,540,143 lbs. 1860.-204,141,168 Jbs. 1865.-445,947,600 lbs. 

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 1846. — 
4,570,581 lbs. 1860.-20,214,173 lbs. 1865.-20,679,111 lbs. 

3 EXPORT OF WOOL FROM THE CAPE TO GREAT BRITAIN. 
1846.-2,958,457 lbs. 1860.-16,574,345 lbs. 1865.-29,920,623 lbs. 

EXPORT OF WOOL FROM AUSTRALIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 
1846.-21,789,346 lbs. 1860.-59,166,616 lbs. 1865.-109,734,261 lbs. 

4 The economic development of the United States is itself a product 
of European, more especially of English modern industry. In their present 
form (1866) the States must still be considered a European colony. [Added in 
the 4 th German edition.— "Since then they have developed into the country 



452 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 







eft 


oo 


CM 




•tf 


CO 






V}&lt; 




CM 




o 


3 






CO 


CM 


^-i 




NT 




$ 

00 
















fc 


co 


N? 




£ 


o 






CO* 


CM 


CM 

CO* 




os 
o* 

CM 








TH 


vf 


C^ 




O 


CO 






SB 




^H 




CO 


SS 




&lt;~i£&gt; 
















COCO 


os 


CM 


t^ 




«rH 


o 




oooo 




8 


O 




S 
8 








CM 


O 


CM 




V? 


CM 




1 


«o 


lO 


CO 




SS5 


CO 




coo 

iO CO 


CM 


„-? 


CM 




„h? 


o 




oooo 


^1 
OS 

© 


$ 


o* 




OS 
CO 

00 
CM 








t^ 


^H 


CO 




CO 


^H 






CO 


OS 


»3« 




CM 


a 




. 


CM 


vr 


t^ 




OS 




wiO 
















ifliO 


iO 


t^ 


t^ 




CM 


o 




oo oo 


V}&lt; 


o 


CO 




t^ 








CO 
00 


CO 


© 

00 




CM 








CM 


&lt;vr-&lt; 


»— , 




oo 


o 






LO 


CO 


OS 




OS 








iO 


vr 


o 




lO 


CO 




CO o 


CO 


to 


•*H 




c^ 


d 




00 00 


l&gt; 


lO 


CM 




OS 








00* 


TH 


CO 

oo 




CM 








CO 

00 


CO 

m 

o 


8 

00 




OS 


§ 




-r-lrt 
*3- &lt;* 


CO* 
vr 1 


g 


o 




CM 
CO 


o" 




55 


00 
CM 




CM 




CM 

t-* 
CM 








OS 


o 


OS 




t^ 


CM 






CM 


o- 


OS 




s 


00 

o 




COO 
O0 •* 


OS 


■^H 


t— 




OS 


d 




oo oo 


00 


VO 


CO 




CM 








CO 
CM 


CM 


CM 




OS 
CM 








CO 


CO 


o 




o. 


CO 






c^ 


CO 






O 


CO 




. 


CO 


CO 


&gt;*H 




*TH 


q 




■mT) 
















co oo 


CD 


lO 






•^H 


o 




oo oo 


OS 


CM 


t&gt;- 




CM 








o 


CM 


00 




CD 

vl* 
















CM 












u 

CO 

&gt; 

o 






S ' 


"s g-^-1 11 
















&gt;&gt;3 a .sl 




















Jt 2 

Si 

IS 


o-j 

o 


O 


Pi 

s 

E. 

co C 


H 


O 

EH 

&lt; 

P 
ft 

O 
ft 


bo . 

&gt;s 

C3 t, 

as 
ft 

&gt;?* 

7^ &lt;-&gt; 


srage quantit 
orn, &amp;c, in 
onsamed ann 
er head over 
bove the 
roduce consi 






a. 


Oh 


o x 




03 °3 






s 


X, 


X « 




s » 


^ U U Act U&gt; 






H 


H 




^ 


&lt; 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 453 

The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of ex- 
panding by jumps, and the dependence of that system on the 
markets of the world, necessarily beget feverish production, 
followed by over-filling of the markets, whereupon contraction 
of the markets brings on crippling of production. The life of 
modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate ac- 
tivity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. The 
uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the em- 
ployment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the 
operatives become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the 
industrial cycle. Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages 
between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of 
each in the markets. This share is directly proportional to the cheap- 
ness of the product. Besides the rivalry that this struggle begets in 
the application of improved machinery for replacing labour- 
power, and of new methods of production, there also comes a time 
in every industrial cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages be- 
neath the value of labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of 
cheapening commodities. 1 



whose industry holds second place in the world, without on that account 
entirely losing their colonial character."— F. E.] 

EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO 
GREAT BRITAIN 

1846.-401,949,393 lbs. 1852.-765,630,543 lbs. 
1859.-961,707,264 lbs. 1860.-1.115,890,608 lbs. 
EXPORT OF CORN, &amp;c, FROM THE UNITED STATES 
TO GREAT BRITAIN. 

1850. 1862. 

Wheat, cwts 16,202,312 41,033,503 

Barley, 3,669,653 6,624,800 

Oats 3,174,801 4,426,994 

Rye, 388,749 7,108 

Flour, . 3,819,440 7,207,113 

Buckwheat, cwts 1,054 19,571 

Maize, cwts 5,473,161 11,694,818 

Bere or Bigg (a sort of Barley), 

cwts 2,039 7,675 

Peas, cwts 811,620 1,024,722 

Beans, , 1,822,972 2,037,137 

Total exports 34,365,«01 74,083,351 

1 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by 
the shoemakers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by a lock-out, 
it is stated: "Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by 
the introduction of riveting in the place of stitching. At that time good wages 
could be earned. Great competition was shown between the different firms 



454 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number 
of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of 
the amount of capital invested in mills. This growth, however, 
is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. It 
is, besides, constantly interrupted by the technical progress 
that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, 
at another, actually displaces old ones. This qualitative change 
in mechanical industry continually discharges hands from the 
factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh stream of recruits, 
while the purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs 
not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh contin- 
gents. The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and 
attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, 
constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies. 

The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by tak- 
ing a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry. 

From 1770 to 1815 this trade was depressed or stagnant for 
5 years only. During this period of 45 years the English man- 
ufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and of the markets 
of the world. From 1815 to 1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 pros- 
perity; 1824 abolition of the laws against Trades' Unions, great 
extension of factories everywhere; 1825 crisis; 1826 great misery 
and riots among the factory operatives; 1827 slight improvement; 
1828 great increase in power-looms, and in exports; 1829 exports, 



as to which could turn out the neatest article. Shortly afterwards, however, 
a worse kind of competition sprang up, namely, that of underselling one an- 
other in the market. The injurious consequences soon manifested themselvesin 
reductions of wages, and so sweepingly quick was the fall in the price of 
labour, that many firms now pay only one half of the original wages. And 
yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, with each alteration 
in the scale of wages, to increase. " Even bad times are utilised by the manufac- 
turers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, i.e., 
by a direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. One example (it- 
has reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving): "From information 
I have received from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be 
no doubt that wages have been reduced to a greater extent than either the 
competition of the foreign producers, or other circumstances have rendered 
necessary . . . the majority of weavers are working at a reduction of 30 to 
40 per cent, in their wages. A piece of ribbon for making which the weaver 
got 6s. or 7s. five years back, now only brings them 3s. 3d. or 3s. 6d.; other 
work is now priced at 2s. and 2s. 3d which was formerly priced at 4s. and 4s. 
3d. The reduction in wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent than 
is necessary for increasing demand. Indeed, the reductioji in the cost of weav- 
ing, in the case of many descriptions of ribbons, has not been accompanied 
by any corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured arti- 
cle." (Mr. F. D. Longe's Report. "Ch. Emp. Com., V. Rep., 1866," p, 114,1). 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 455 

especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830 glutted markets, 
great distress; 1831 to 1833 continued depression, the monopoly 
of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the East India 
Company; 1834 great increase of factories and machinery, short- 
ness of hands. The new poor law furthers the migration of agricul- 
tural labourers into the factory districts. The country districts 
swept of children. White slave trade; 1835 great prosperity, con- 
temporaneous starvation of the hand-loom weavers; 1836 great 
prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 revival; 
1840 great depression, riots, calling out of the military; 1841 
and 1842 frightful suffering among the factory operatives; 1842 the 
manufacturers lock the hands out of the factories in order to en- 
force the repeal of the Corn Laws. The operatives stream in thou- 
sands into the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back 
by the military, and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 
1843 great misery; 1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity; 1846 con- 
tinued improvement at first, then reaction. Repeal of the Corn 
Laws; 1847 crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per 
cent, in honour of the "big loaf"; 1848 continued depression; 
Manchester under military protection; 1849 revival; 1850 prosper- 
ity; 1851 falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes; 1852 improve- 
ment begins, strikes continue, the manufacturers threaten to 
import foreign hands; 1853 increasing exports. Strike for 8 months, 
and great misery at Preston; 1854 prosperity, glutted markets; 
1855 news of failures stream in from the United States, Canada, 
and the Eastern markets; 1856 great prosperity; 1857 crisis; 
1858 improvement; 1859 great prosperity, increase in factories; 
1860 Zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian, Australian, 
and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863 they 
had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of Commerce, 
enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861 prosperity 
continues for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton 
famine; 1862 to 1863 complete collapse. 

The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dis- 
pense with dwelling upon it for a moment. From the indica- 
tions as to the condition of the markets of the world in 1860 
and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of 
time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent advanta- 
geous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the reports of 
the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament 
by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. 1 No doubt, 



1 Goni. "Reports of Insp. of Fact. 31st October, 1862," p. 30. 



456 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

among the 2,887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861, 
there were many of small size. According to the report of Mr. 
A. Redgrave, out of the 2,109 mills included in his district, 392, 
or 19% employed less than ten horse-power each; 345, or 16% 
employed 10 H. P., and less than 20 H. P.; while 1,372 employed 
upwards of 20 H. P. * The majority of the small mills were weaving 
sheds, built during the period of prosperity after 1858, for the most 
part by speculators, of whom one supplied the yarn, another the 
machinery, a third the buildings, and were worked by men who 
had been overlookers, or by other persons of small means. These 
small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. The same fate would 
have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved 
off only by the cotton famine. Although they formed one-third 
of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed 
a much smaller part of the capital invested in the cotton trade. 
As to the extent of the stoppage, it appears from authentic esti- 
mates, that in October 1862, 60.3% of the spindles, and 58% of 
the looms were standing. This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, 
and, of course, requires considerable modification for individual 
districts. Only very few mills worked full time (60 hours a week), 
the remainder worked at intervals. Even in those few cases where 
full time was worked, and at the customary rate of piece-wage, 
the weekly wages of the operatives necessarily shrank, owing to 
good cotton being replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in 
fine spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure 
cotton by mixings of waste and Surat. The shorter fibre of the 
Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the 
thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients for 
flour in sizing the warps, all these lessened the speed of the ma- 
chinery, or the number of the looms that could be superintended 
by one weaver, increased the labour caused by defects in the ma- 
chinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the mass of the 
product turned off. Where Surat cotton was used, the loss to the 
operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 30, and more per 
cent. But besides this, the majority of the manufacturers reduced 

the rate of piece-wage by5, 7-y, and 10 per cent. We can therefore 

conceive the situation of those hands who were employed for only 3, 

A 

3y or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day f Even in 1863, 
after a comparative improvement had set in, the weekly wages of 

1 1. c, p. 19. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 457 

spinners and of weavers were 3s. 4d., 3s. 10d., 4s. 6d. and 5s. Id. 1 
Even in this miserable state of things, however, the inventive 
spirit of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making 
deductions from wages. These were to some extent inflicted as 
a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due 
to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery. Moreover, 
where the manufacturer owned the cottages of the workpeople, 
he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these mis- 
erable wages. Mr. Redgrave tells us of self-acting minders (oper- 
atives who manage a pair of self-acting mules) "earning at the 
end of a fortnight's full work 8s. lid., and that from this sum was 
deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however, re- 
turning half the rent as a gift. The minders took away the sum of 
6s. lid. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. 
to 9s. per week, and the weavers from 2s. to 6s. per week, during 
the latter part of 1862." 2 Even when working short time the rent 
was frequently deducted from the wages of the operatives. 3 No 
wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever 
broke out. But more characteristic than all this, was the revolu- 
tion that took place in the process of production at the expense 
of the workpeople. Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of 
anatomists on frogs, were formally made. "Although," says Mr. 
Redgrave, "I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in 
the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the same amount 
week by week. The operatives are subject to great fluctuation from 
the constant experimentalising of the manufacturers... the earn- 
ings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton 
mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent, of former 
earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 
50 to 60 per cent." 4 These experiments were not made solely at 
the expense of the workman's means of subsistence. His five 
senses also had to pay the penalty. "The people who are employed 
in making up Surat cotton complain very much. They inform me, 
on opening the bales of cotton there is an intolerable smell, which 
causes sickness.... In the mixing, scribbling and carding rooms, 
the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, 
and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. A disease of 
the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained in the 
Surat cotton, also prevails.... The fibre being so short, a great 



1 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1863," pp. 41 45. 

3 J. c, pp 41-42. 
8 1. c, p. 57. 

4 I. c, pp. 50-51. 



458 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

amount of size, both animal and vegetable, is used. . . . Bron- 
chitis is more prevalent owing to the dust. Inflammatory sore throat 
is common, from the same cause. Sickness and dyspepsia are pro- 
duced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver 
sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle." On the other hand, 
the substitutes for flour were a Fortunatus' purse to the manu- 
facturers, by increasing the weight of the yarn. They caused "15 
lbs. of raw material to weigh 26 lbs. after it was woven." 1 In the 
Report of Inspectors of Factories for 30th April, 1864, we read 
as follows: "The trade is availing itself of this resource at present 

to an extent which is even discreditable. I have heard on good au- 

1 
thority of a cloth weighing 8 lbs. which was made of 5-t- lbs. cotton 

3 1 

and 2^7- lbs. size; and of another cloth weighing 5-^- lbs., of which 

2 lbs. was size. These were ordinary export shirtings. In cloths of 
other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent, size is sometimes 
added; so that a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that 
he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound than 
he paid for the mere yarn of which they are composed." 2 But 
the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experiments 
of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities 
outside, not only from reduced wages and absence of work, from 
want and from charity, and from the eulogistic speeches of lords 
and commons. "Unfortunate females who, in consequence of the 
cotton famine, were at its commencement thrown out of employ- 
ment, and have thereby become outcasts of society; and now, 
though trade has revived, and work is plentiful, continue members 
of that unfortunate class, and are likely to continue so. There are 
also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known 
for the last 25 years." 3 

We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton 
trade, from 1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; 
but this was the period of monopoly. The second period from 
1815 to 1863 counts, during its 48 years, only 20 years of re- 
vival and prosperity against 28 of depression and stagnation. Be- 
tween 1815 and 1830 the competition with the continent of Europe 
and with the United States sets in. After 1833, the extension of 
the Asiatic markets is enforced by "destruction of the human 



1 1. c, pp. 62-63. 

2 "Rep. &amp;c, 30th April, 1864," p. 27. 

8 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable ot Bolton, in "Rep. oi 

Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 61-62. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 459 

race" (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers). Aft- 
er the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are 8 years 
of moderate activity and prosperity against 9 years of depression 
and stagnation. The condition of the adult male operatives, even 
during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the note sub- 
joined. 1 

SECTION 8.— REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE, 
HANDICRAFTS, AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY 
BY MODERN INDUSTRY 

a. Overthrow of Co-operation based on Handicraft 
and on the Division of Labour 

We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation 
based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the divi- 
sion of handicraft labour. An example of the first sort is the 
mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers. A 
striking example of the second kind, is the needle-making ma- 
chine. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made in 



1 In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, 
&amp;c, for the purpose of forming a society for organised emigration, we find 
the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely 
essential to raise them from their present prostrate condition, few will deny; 
but to show that a continuous stream of emigration is at all times demanded, 
and, without which it is impossible for them to maintain their position in 
ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 
the official value of cotton goods exported was £17,665,378, whilst the real 
marketable value was £20,070,824. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods 
exported, was £182,221,681; but the real or marketable value was only 
£43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the 
former price. To produce results so disadvantageous to the country generally, 
and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have co-operated, 
which, had circumstances permitted, we should have brought more prominent- 
ly under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious 
one is the constant redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous 
in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly 
extending market to save it from annihilation. Our cotton mills may be 
brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under pres- 
ent arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is con- 
stantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in stating 
that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, 
yet, from the natural increase of population, and the displacement of labour 
to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the mostpros- 
perous times find it impossible to obtain work in factories on any condi- 
tions whatever." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1863," pp. 51-52.) 
We shall, in a later chapter, see how our friends, the manufacturers, 
endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent by every 
means, including State interference, the emigration of the operatives. 



460 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. On the other hand, a 
single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working-day of 11 hours. 
One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so pro- 
duces near upor 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 
in a week. * A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation 
or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of 
a handicraft character. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but 
a transition to the factory system, which, as a rule, makes its ap- 
pearance so soon as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose 
of driving the machines, by a mechanical motive power, such as 
steam or water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an 
industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of me- 
chanical power. This is effected by hiring steam power, as is done 
in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small caloric- 
engines, as in some branches of weaving. 2 In the Coventry silk weav- 
ing industry the experiment of "cottage factories" was tried. In 
the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine- 
house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms 
in the cottages. In all cases the power was hired at so much per 
loom. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked 
or not. Each cottage held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to the 
weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle 
between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted 
over 12 years. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cot- 
tage factories. 3 Wherever the nature of the process did not in- 
volve production on a large scale, the new industries that have 
sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel- 
pen making, &amp;c, have, as a general rule, first passed through the 
handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short 
phases of transition to the factory stage. The transition is very diffi- 
cult in those cases where the production of the article by manufac- 
ture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of a great 
number of disconnected ones. This circumstance formed a great 
hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen factories. Neverthe- 
less, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented that automati- 
cally performed 6 separate operations at once. The first steel-pens 
were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at 



1 "Ch. Empl. Comm. Ill Report, 1864," p. 108, n. 447. 

2 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based 
on machinery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition to the 
factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared 
with Europe and even with England, stride on in seven-league boots. 

8 See "Rep. of Insp. of Pact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 64. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 461 

£7 4s. the gross; in 1830 they were supplied by manufacture at 
8s., and today the factory system supplies them to the trade at 
from 2s. to 6d. the gross. 1 

b. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture 
and Domestic Industries 

Along with the development of the factory system and of 
the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production 
in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but al- 
ters its character. The principle, carried out in the factory system, 
of analysing the process of production into its constituent phases, 
and of solving the problems thus proposed by the application of 
mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole range of the natural 
sciences, becomes the determining principle everywhere. Hence, 
machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first 
for one detail process, then for another. Thus the solid crystal of 
their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dis- 
solved, and makes way for constant changes. Independently of this, 
a radical change takes place in the composition of the collective 
labourer, a change of the persons working in combination. In con- 
trast with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is 
thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, 
of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, 
on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England. 
This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, 
whether employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called 
domestic industry, whether carried on in the houses of the 
workpeople or in small workshops. This modern so-called domes- 
tic industry has nothing, except the name, in common with the 
old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which pre-sup- 
poses independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farm- 
ing, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his 
family. That old-fashioned industry has now been converted into 
an outside department of the factory, the manufactory, or the 
warehouse. Besides the factory operatives, the manufacturing 
workmen and the handicraftsmen, whom it concentrates in large 
masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in 

1 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large 
scale. It produced, so early as 1851, over 180,000,000 of pens yearly, and con- 
sumed 120 tons of steel. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in 
the United Kingdom, and at present produces thousands of millions of steel- 
pens. According to the Census of 1861, the number of persons employed was 
1,428, of whom 1,268 females from 5 years of age upwards. 



462 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



motion, by means, of invisible threads, another army; that of the 
workers in the domestic industries, who dwell in the large towns 
and are also scattered over the face of the country. An example: 
The shirt factory of Messrs. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 
1,000 operatives in the factory itself, and 9,000 people spread up 
and down the country and working in their own houses. 1 

The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is 
carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture 
than in the factory proper. This is because the technical foun- 
dation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of ma- 
chines for muscular power, and the light character of the labour, is 
almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and at the same time 
women and over-young children are subjected, in a most uncon- 
scionable way, to the influence of poisonous or injurious sub- 
stances. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called do- 
mestic industry than in manufactures, and that because the power 
of resistance in the labourers decreases with their dissemina- 
tion; because a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate them- 
selves between the employer and the workman; because a domestic 
industry has always to compete either with the factory system, 
or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because 
poverty robs the workman of the conditions most essential to his 
labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment be- 
comes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these the 
last resorts of the masses made "redundant" by Modern Industry 
and Agriculture, competition for work attains its maximum. Econ- 
omy in the means of production, first systematically carried out 
in the factory system, and there, from the very beginning, co- 
incident with the most reckless squandering of labour-power, 
and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for labour — this 
economy now shows its antagonistic and murderous side more 
and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social pro- 
ductive power of labour and the technical basis for a combination 
of processes are developed in that branch. 

c. Modern Manufacture 

I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles 
laid down above. Asa matter of fact, the reader is already familiar 
with numerous instances given in the chapter on the working- 
day. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neigh- 



'Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep. 18G4, p. LXVI1I., n. 415. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 463 

bourhood, there are employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 
children and young persons, besides 10,000 women. There they 
are to be seen in the unwholesome brass-foundries, button facto- 
ries, enamelling, galvanising, and lackering works. 1 Owing to the 
excessive labour of their workpeople, both adult and non-adult, 
certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, 
have got the ill-omened name of "slaughter-houses." 2 Similar ex- 
cesses are practised in book-binding, where the victims are chiefly 
women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work 
in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufacto- 
ries, and chemical works; young people are worked to death at 
turning the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by 
machinery. 3 One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the 
worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and young 
girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. It is well 
known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of 
rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. They 
flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South Ameri- 
ca, and from the Canary Islands. But the chief sources of their 
supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Bel- 
gium, and Holland. They are used for manure, for making bed- 
flocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The 
rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other 
infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. 4 
A classical example of over-work, of hard and inappropriate la- 
bour, and of its brutalising effects on the workman from his child- 
hood upwards, is afforded not only by coal-mining and miners 
generally, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry the 
recently invented machinery is, in England, used only here and 
there. Between May and September the work lasts from 5 in the 
morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying is done in 
the open air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 9 in the eve- 
ning. Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in the evening is consid- 
ered "reduced" and "moderate." Both boys and girls of 6 and even 
of 4 years of age are employed. They work for the same number of 



1 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield. 

2 "Gh. Empl. Comm. V. Rep. 1866," p. 3., n. 24; p. 6, n. 55, 56; p. 7, 
n. 59, 60. 

3 I.e., pp. 114, 115, n. 6,7. The commissioner justly remarks that though 
as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young persons replace 
machines. 

4 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public 
Health, VIII. Rep." Lond. 1866, app., pp. 196,208. 



464 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



hours, often longer, than the adults. The work is hard and the sum- 
mer heat increases the exhaustion. In a certain tile-field at Mosley, 
e.g., a young woman, 24 years of age, was in the habit of making 
2,000 tiles a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who carried 
the clay for her, and stacked the tiles. These girls carried daily 
10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of 30 feet, 
and then for a distance of 210 feet. "It is impossible for a child 
to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great moral 
degradation. . . . the low language, which they are accustomed 
to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and 
shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild, they 
grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dissolute. . . . 
A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. Each 
moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, 
supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage. 
Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls 
all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exception- 
ally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. These 
people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither 
the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the 
least observed. Many of these cottages are models of untidi- 
ness, dirt, and dust. . . . The greatest evil of the system that 
employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this, that, 
as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their 
after-life to the most abandoned rabble. They become rough, foul- 
mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. 
Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, 
hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings 
of decency and of shame with contempt. During meal-times they 
lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neigh- 
bouring canal. Their heavy day's work at length completed, they 
put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses. " 
That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards 
among the whole of this class, is only natural. "The worst is that 
the brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as well, said 
one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise 
and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!" 1 

As to the manner in which capital effects an economy in the 
requisites of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I include 
all workshops of larger size, except factories proper), official and 



1 "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep., 1866," pp. xvi-xviii, n. 86-97, and pp. 
130-133, n. 39-71. See also III. Rep., 1864, pp. 48, 56. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 



465 



most ample material bearing on it is to be found in the Public 
Health Reports IV. (1863) and VI. (1864). The description of the 
workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tail- 
ors, surpasses the most loathsome phantasies of our romance writ- 
ers. The effect on the health of the workpeople is self-evident. 
Dr. Simon, the chief medical officer of the Privy Council and the 
official editor of the "Public Health Reports," says: "In my fourth 
Report (1863) I s lowed, how it is practically impossible for the 
workpeople to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, 
viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their 
employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon 
him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. 
I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapa- 
ble of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to 
obtain any effective support from the paid administrations of the 
sanitary police. . . . The life of myriads of workmen and work- 
women is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never- 
ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets." 1 
In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the 
state of health Dr. Simon gives the following table of mortality. 2 



Number of persons 

of all ages employed 

in the respective 

industries. 


Industries compared 
as regards health. 


Death-rate per 100,000 men in 

the respective industries between 

the stated ages. 


Age 25-35. 


Age 3 5-4 5. 


Age 45-55. 


958,265 
22,301 men \ 
12,379 women / 
13,803 


Agriculture in 
England &amp; Wales 

London tailors . . 

London printers. . 


743 
958 
894 


805 
1,262 
1,747 


1,145 
2,093 
2,367 



1 "Public Health. Sixth Rep.," Lond. 1864, pp. 29, 31. 

2 1. c, p. 30. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London 
tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much greater, be- 
cause the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of 
young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and "improvers," who 
come for the purpose of being perfected in their trade. These figure in the 
census as Londoners, they swell out the number of heads on which the Lon- 
don death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number 
of deaths in that place. The greater part of them in fact return to the country, 
and especially in cases of severe illness. (1. c.) 



466 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



d. Modern Domestic Industry 

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. In order to get 
an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts 
its exploitation in the background of modern mechanical industry, 
one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making, l 
carried on in a few remote villages of England. In this place, 
however, it will be enough to give a few examples from those 
branches of the lace-making and straw-plaiting industries that are 
not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, and that as yet do not 
compete with branches carried on in factories or in manufactories. 

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the produc- 
tion of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Fac- 
tory Act, 1861. Almost the whole of the remaining 140,000 are 
women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, 
however, being weakly represented. The state of health of this 
cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following 
table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician to the Nottingham 
General Dispensary. Out of 686 female patients who were lace- 
makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number 
of consumptive ones were: 

1852.— 1 in 45. 1857.— 1 in 13. 

1853.— 1 in 28. 1858.— 1 in 15. 

1854.— 1 in 17. 1859.— 1 in 9. 

1855.— 1 in 18. I860.— 1 in 8. 

1856.— 1 in 15. 1861.— 1 in 8. 2 

This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for 
the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker 
of lies among the Free-trade bagmen of Germany. 

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the 
lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in 
England. The branches that we are now about to examine, sole- 
ly with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, 
and not those who work in manufactories or warehouses fall into 
two divisions, viz. (1), finishing; (2), mending. The former gives 
the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes 
numerous sub-divisions. 



1 I allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out 
and made bv machinery. See "Child. Empl. Comm., Third Rep.," pp. xi.. 
xix., n. 125-130, p. 52, n. 11, p. 114, n. 487, p. 137, n. 674. 

2 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep.," p. xxii., n. 166. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 467 

The lace finishing is done either in what are called "mis- 
tresses' houses," or by women in their own houses, with or with- 
out the help of their children. The women who keep the "mis- 
tresses' houses" are themselves poor. The workroom is in a private 
house. The mistresses take orders from manufacturers, or from 
warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young 
children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating demand of 
the business will allow. The number of the workwomen employed 
in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to 
20 in others. The average age at which the children commence 
work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. The usual 
working-hours are from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, 

with 1-z- hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, 

and often in the foul workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour 
frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 
11, or 12 o'clock at night. In English barracks the regulation 
space allotted to each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the 
military hospitals 1,200 cubic feet. But in those finishing sties 
there are but 67 to 100 cubic feet to each person. At the same 
time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. In order 
to keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or flagged, 
the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their 
shoes. "It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 
children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more 
than 12 feet square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at 
work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monoto- 
ny, and is besides carried on under every possible unwholesome 
condition. . . . Even the very youngest children work with a 
strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever 
giving their fingers rest or slowering their motion. If a question 
be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from 
fear of losing a single moment." The "long stick" is used by the 
mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the working-hours are 
prolonged. "The children gradually tire and become as restless 
as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupa- 
tion that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from the 
uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work is like slav- 
ery." 1 When women and their children work at home, which 
now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of 
things is, if possible, still worse. This sort of work is given out 



1 "Gh. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., 1864," pp. xix., xx., xxi. 



468 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



within a circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. On leaving 
the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at night, the children are often 
given a bundle of lace to take home with them and finish. The Pha- 
risee of a capitalist represented by one of his servants, accompanies 
this action, of course, with the unctuous phrase: "That's for 
mother," yet he knows well enough that the poor children must sit 
up and help. 1 

Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two 
agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending 
from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and 
including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a 
great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and North- 
ampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Hunt- 
ingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural labourers are the 
places where the work is usually carried on. Many manufacturers 
employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are chiefly 
children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. The 
state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here 
repeated, save that instead of the "mistresses' houses," we find 
what are called "lace-schools," kept by poor women in their cot- 
tages. From their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth 
or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the 
first year the very young ones work from four to eight hours, and 
later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. 
"The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cot- 
tages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates 
kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in 
winter. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small 
store-rooms without fire-places. . . . The over-crowding in these 
dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. 
Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing 
substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller 
cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and 

a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each person; in another, where the smell 

\ 
was unbearable, 18 persons and 24y cubic feet per head. In this 

\ 
industry are to be found employed children of 2 and 2— years." 2 

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and 
Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part 
of Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. 



1 1. c, pp. xxi, xxii. 

2 I. c, pp. xxix., xxx. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSRY 469 

In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting 
and straw-hat making; of these 3,815 were males of all ages, 
the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7,000 children, 
were under 20 years of age. In the place of the lace-schools we 
find here the "straw-plait schools." The children commence their 
instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 4th, often between 
their 3rd and 4th year. Education, of course, they get none. The 
children themselves call the elementary schools, "natural schools," 
to distinguish them from these blood-sucking institutions, in which 
they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 
30 yards daily, prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These 
same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, 
till 10, 11, and 12 o'clock at night. The straw cuts their mouths, 
with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr. 
Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of 
medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum 
space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. But 
in the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than 

2 1 

in the lace-schools, "12^-, 17, 18 — and below 22 cubic feet for each 

person." The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commission- 
ers, Mr. White, represents less space than the half of what a child 
would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. 
Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The 
wretched half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much 
as possible out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are 
grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, 
and leave them. "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound 
in a population so brought up. . . . Their morality is at the 
lowest ebb, ... a great number of the women have illegitimate 
children, and that at such an immature age that even those most 
conversant with criminal statistics are astounded." 1 And the 
native land of these model families is the pattern Christian 
country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, cer- 
tainly a competent authority on Christianity! 

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the 
maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in 
rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal 
amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but 
especially in the lace districts. 2 



1 1. c, pp. xl., xli. 

2 "Child. Empl. Comm. I. Rep. 1863," p. 185. 



470 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



e. Passage of Modern Manufacture, 

and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. 

The hastening of this revolution by the application 

of the Factory Acts to those Industries 

The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the 
labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every nor- 
mal condition requisite for working and living, and by the 
sheer brutality of over-work and night-work, meets at last with 
natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. So also, when 
based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and 
capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as this point is at 
last reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for 
the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid con- 
version of the scattered domestic industries and also of manufac- 
tures into factory industries. 

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is 
afforded by the production of wearing apparel. This industry, 
according to the classification of the Children's Employment 
Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, 
cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers, shirt-makers, 
corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor 
branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars, &amp;c. In 1861, 
the number of females employed in these industries, in England and 
Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 115,242 at the least were 
under 20, and 16,650 under 15 years of age. The number of these 
workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. The 
number of males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, 
shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 
14,964 under 15 years, 89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 
over 20 years. Many of the smaller branches are not included in 
these figures. But take the figures as they stand; we then have for 
England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total 
of 1,024,277 persons, about as many as are absorbed by agricul- 
ture and cattle breeding. We begin to understand what becomes 
of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic of 
machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which 
that machinery sets free. 

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in 
manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction 
of that division of labour, the membra disjecta of which were 
found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 471 

these, however, do not, as formerly, work for individual con- 
sumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such 
an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country 
carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; 
finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic 
workers, who form an external department of the manufac- 
tories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller 
masters. x 

The raw material, &amp;c, is supplied by mechanical industry, 
the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci et miseri- 
corde) is composed of the individuals "liberated" by mechanical 
industry and improved agriculture. The manufactures of this 
class owed their origin chiefly to the capitalist's need of having 
at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of de- 
mand. 2 These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered 
handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad 
foundation. The great production of surplus-value in these branches 
of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were 
and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than 
requisite for a miserable vegetation, and to the extension of work- 
ing-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. 
It was in fact by the cheapness of the human sweat and the human 
blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets 
were constantly being extended, and continue daily to be extend- 
ed; more especially was this the case with England's colonial 
markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. At 
last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old meth- 
od, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, accom- 
panied more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer 
sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly 
extending competition of the capitalists. The hour struck for the 
advent of machinery. The decisively revolutionary machine, the 
machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the num- 
berless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailor- 



1 In England millinery and dressmaking are tor the most part carried 
on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live there, 
partly by women who live off the premises. 

2 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory 
that employed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe manufac- 
tory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young 
persons. 



472 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

ing, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many others, is the 
sewing-machine. 

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all 
machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized 
upon new branches of trade. Children of too tender an age are 
sent adrift. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with 
that of the house-workers, many of whom belong to the poorest 
of the poor. That of the better situated handicraftsmen, with 
whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine hands are 
exclusively girls and young women. With the help of mechanical 
force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heav- 
ier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of 
old women and very young children. The overpowering competi- 
tion crushes the weakest of the manual labourers. The fearful 
increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in Lon- 
don runs parallel with the extension of machine sewing. 1 The 
new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand 
alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing, according to the 
weight, size, and special make of the machine, and expend a 
great deal of labour-power. Their occupation is unwholesome, 
owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so 
long as under the old system. Wherever the sewing-machine lo- 
cates itself in narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds 
to the unwholesome influences. "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on 
entering low-ceiled workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands 
are working is unbearable. . . . The heat, partly due to the gas 

stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible Even 

when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 
6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into 
a swoon regularly every day." 2 

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the nec- 
essary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, 
is effected by a medley of transition forms. These forms vary ac- 
cording to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prev- 
alent in one branch of industry or the other, to the time during 
which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the 
workpeople, to the preponderance of manufacture, of handicrafts 



1 An instance. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General 
dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. On the same 
day The Times reports another case. Six victims of starvation in one week! 

2 "Child. Empl. Comm., Second Rep., 1864," p. lxvii., n. 406-9, p. 84, 
n. 124, p. Jxxiii., n. 441, p. 68, n. 6, p. 84, n. 126, p. 78, n. 85, p. 76, 
n. 69, p. lxxii., n. 483. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 473 

or of domestic industry, to the rent of the workrooms, x &amp;c. In dress- 
making, for instance, where the labour for the most part was al- 
ready organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine 
at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry. 
In tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, &amp;c, all the forms are 
intermingled. Here the factory system proper. There middlemen 
receive the raw material from the capitalist en chef, and group 
around their sewing-machines, in "chambers" and "garrets," from 
10 to 50 or more workwomen. Finally, as is always the case with 
machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can 
also be used in dwarfish proportions, handicraftsmen and do- 
mestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra 
labour from without, make use of their own sewing-machines. 2 
The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist 
concentrates a large number of machines on his premises, and 
then distributes the produce of those machines for further mani- 
pulation amongst the domestic workers. 3 The variety of the trans- 
ition forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion 
into the factory system proper. This tendency is nurtured by the 
very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which 
push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, 
of previously separated branches of a trade. It is also favoured 
by the circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain 
other operations, are most conveniently done on the premises where 
the machine is at work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation 
of the hand sewers, and of the domestic workers who work with 
their own machines. This fate has already in part overtaken them. 
The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing- 
machines, 4 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the 
markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal 
to the domestic workers for the sale of their machines. The over- 
production of sewing-machines themselves, causes their pro- 
ducers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a week, 
thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of 



1 "The rental of premises required or workrooms seems the element 
which ultimately determines the point; and consequently it is in the met- 
ropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and fami- 
lies has been longest retained, and earliest returned to." (1. c, p. 83, n. 123). 
The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking. 

2 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work- 
people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not occur. 

3 1. c, p. 83, n. 122. 

4 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 
1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use. 



474 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



machines. * Constant changes in the construction of the machines, 
and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the 
older makes, and allow of their being sold in great numbers, at 
absurd prices, to large capitalists, who alone can thus employ 
them at a profit. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for 
man gives in this, as in all similar revolutions, the finishing blow. 
At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficul- 
ties, such as unsteadiness in the machines, difficulty in controlling 
their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &amp;c, all 
of which are soon overcome by experience. 2 If, on the one hand, 
the concentration of many machines in large manufactories leads 
to the use of steam power, on the other hand, the competition of 
steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of work- 
people and machines in large factories. Thus England is at present 
experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wear- 
ing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the 
conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work 
into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, 
totally changed and disorganised under the influence of modern 
industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the 
horrors of the factory system, without participating in any of the 
elements of social progress it contains. 3 

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, 
is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts 
to all industries in which women, young persons and children 
are employed. The compulsory regulation of the working-day 
as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the system of 
relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain 
age, &amp;c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery 4 and the sub- 



1 I. c, p. 84, n. 124. 

2 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt 
factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory of 
Messrs- Tait at Limerick which employs about 1,200 hands. 

3 "Tendency to Factory System" (1. c, p. Ixvii). "The whole employment 
is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same change as 
that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &amp;c." (i. c, n. 405.) "A complete revo- 
lution" (1. c, p. xlvi., n. 318). At the date of the Child. Empl. Comm. of 1840 
stocking making was still done by manual labour. Since 1846 various sorts 
of machines have been introduced, which are now driven by steam. The total 
number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, em- 
ployed in stocking making in England, was in 1862 about 129,000. Of these 
only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 11th February, 
1862, working under the Factory Acts. 

4 Thus e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. Cochrane, of the Britain 
Pottery, Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone exten- 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 475 

stitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. 1 On 
the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an expan- 
sion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the fur- 
naces, buildings, &amp;c, in one word, greater concentration of the 
means of production and a correspondingly greater concourse of 
workpeople. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately 
urged on behalf of each manufacture threatened with the Factory 
Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old 
scale a greater outlay of capital will be necessary. But as regards 
labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate 
forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as limits are put 
to the working-day and to the employment of children, those in- 
dustries go to the wall. Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour- 
power is the sole foundation of their power to compete. 

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the fac- 
tory system, especially when the length of the working-day is 
fixed, is certainty in the result, i.e., the production in a given 
time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful 
effect. The statutory pauses in the working-day, moreover, imply 
the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work 
does no harm to the article undergoing the process of production. 
This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting 
the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely me- 
chanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical 
processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, 
in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. 
Wherever there is a working-day without restriction as to length, 
wherever there is night-work and unrestricted waste of human life, 
there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work 
to a change for the better is soon looked upon as an everlasting 
barrier erected by Nature. No poison kills vermin with more cer- 
tainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. No 
one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends 
the earthenware manufacturers. In 1864, however, they were 
brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every "im- 
possibility" had vanished. "The improved method," called forth 
by the Act, "of making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, 



sively into machines wrought by unskilled labour, and every day convinces 
us that we can produce a greater quantity than by the old method." ("Rep. 
of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. Acts is to 
force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. c, pp. 13-14). 

1 Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great 
increase of power-jiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers. 



476 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, 
&amp;c, are each events of great importance in the pottery art, and 
mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival. . . . 
It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves 
themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier 
effect on the ware." 1 In spite of every prophecy, the cost-price of 
earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to 
such an extent that the export for the twelve months, ending 
December, 1865, exceeded in value by £ 138,628 the average of 
the preceding three years. In the manufacture of matches it was 
thought to be an indispensable requirement, that boys, even 
while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches 
in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from which rose 
into their faces. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time 
a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the 
vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers. 2 
So, at the present time, in those branches of the lace manufacture 
not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal- 
times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required 
by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from 
three minutes up to an hour and more. To this the Children's 
Employment Commissioners answer: "The circumstances of this 
case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt 
with in our first report. Some of the principal manufacturers in 
the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials 
used, and their various processes, they would be unable, without 
serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. But 
it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous 
arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; 
and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts 
Extension Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an 
interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing 
of the Act before they are required to conform to the meal hours, 
specified by the Factory Acts." 3 Hardly had the Act been passed 
when our friends the manufacturers found out: "The inconveni- 
ences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts 
into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not aris- 



1 "Report of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 96 and 127. 

2 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making 
caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32 boys 
and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. This saving in labour was carried still fur- 
ther in 1865, by the employment of steam power. 

3 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., 1864," p. ix., n. 50. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 477 

en. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, 
we produce more in the same time." 1 It is evident that the English 
legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with 
being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the 
conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away 
all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the 
process, to the restriction and regulation of the working-day. 
Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given in- 
dustry, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed 
within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove 
all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mirabeau's 
"Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is particularly 
applicable to modern technology. But though the Factory Acts 
thus artificially ripen the material elements necessary for the con- 
version of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet 
at the same time, owing to the necessity they impose for greater 
outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, 
and the concentration of capital. 2 

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable 
by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople them- 
selves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. This is es- 
pecially the case where piece-wage predominates, and where loss 
of time in one part of the day or week can be made good by sub- 
sequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises 
the adult workman, and ruins his wife and children. 3 Although 
this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is 



1 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 22. 

2 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried 
out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are not capa- 
ble of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an 
expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the present occupiers." 
"I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. May, "that notwithstanding the tem- 
porary disorganisation which inevitably follows the introduction of such a 
measure (as the Factory Acts Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indic- 
ative of the evils which it was intended to remedy, &amp;c." (Rep, of Insp. 
of Fact., 31 st Oct., 1865.) 

3 With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week 
being generally much increased in duration in consequence of the habit of 
the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of 
Tuesday also." ("Child. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p. vi.) "The little masters 
generally have very irregular hours. They lose two or three days, and then 
work all night to make it up.... They always employ their own children, if 
they have any." (1. c, p. vii.) "The want of regularity in coming to work, 
encouraged by the possibility and practice of making up for this by working 
longer hours "(1. c, p. xviii.) "In Birmingham ... an enormous amount 
of time is lost . . . idling part of the time, slaving the rest." (1. c, p. xi.) 



478 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a natural and rude reaction against the tedium of monotonous drudg- 
ery, it originates, also, to a much greater degree from anarchy in 
production, anarchy that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled exploi- 
tation of labour-power by the capitalist. Besides the general pe- 
riodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations 
in the markets to which each industry is subject, we may also 
reckon what is called "the season," dependent either on the peri- 
odicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation; or on 
fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be exe- 
cuted in the shortest possible time. The habit of giving such orders 
becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and tele- 
graphs. "The extension of the railway system throughout the country 
has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers 
now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once ev- 
ery fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we sup- 
ply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead 
of buying from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were always 
able to work in the slack times, so as to meet the demand of the 
next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the 
demand then." 1 

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject 
to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails peri- 
odically during what is called the season, in consequence of sud- 
den orders. In the outside department of the factory, of the manu- 
factory, and of the warehouse, the so-called domestic workers, 
whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent 
for their raw material and their orders on the caprice of the cap- 
italist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for 
depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing 
by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Here 
then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial 
reserve force that shall be ready at a moment's notice; during one 
part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, 
during the other part, he lets it starve for want of work. "The em- 
ployers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the home- 
work, when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that the work 
goes on till 11, and 12 p. m. or 2 a. m., or as the usual phrase is, 
"all hours," and that in localities where "the stench is enough to 
knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but 



1 "Child. Empl. Comm., IV. Rep.," p. xxxii., "The extension of the rail- 
way system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of giving sudden 
orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of 
the workpeople." (1. c, p. xxxi.) 



MACHINERY AND MQDERN INDUSTRY 479 

shudder to go further." 1 "They are curious men," said one of the 
witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, "they think 
it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is 
nearly idle for the other half." 2 

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those 
"usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and 
still are proclaimed by interested capitalists as obstacles due to 
the nature of the work. This was a favourite cry of the cotton 
lords at the time they were first threatened with the Factory Acts. 
Although their industry more than any other depends on naviga- 
tion, yet experience has given them the lie. Since then, every pre- 
tended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory 
inspectors as a mere sham. 3 The thoroughly conscientious investi- 
gations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that 
the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some indus- 
tries, was to spread the mass of labour previously employed more 
evenly over the whole year; 4 that this regulation was the first 
rational bridle on the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, 5 
caprices that consort so badly with the system of modern industry; 
that the development of ocean navigation and of the means of 
communication generally, has swept away the technical basis 
on which season-work was really supported, 6 and that all other 
so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger build- 
ings, additional machinery, increase in the number of work- 



1 "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. xxxv., n. 235, 237. 

2 "Ch. Empl. Comm. TV. Rep.," p. 127, n. 56. 

5 "With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping or- 
ders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory masters 
in 1832 and 1833. Nothing that can be advanced now on this subject, could 
have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all distances and 
established new regulations for transit. It quite failed at that time of proof 
when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail should it have to be 
tried." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1862," pp. 54, 55.) 

4 "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep.," p. xviii., n. 118. 

5 John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fash- 
ions does increase necessitous poor. It has two great mischiefs in it. 1st, The 
journeymen are miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master- 
weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the journeymen employed 
before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be: 2ndly, 
In the spring the journeymen are not sufficient, but the master-weavers must 
draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in 
a quarter or half a year, which robs the plough of hands, drains the country 
of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves 
some in winter that are ashamed to beg." ("Essays about the Poor, Manufac- 
tures, &amp;c," p. 9.) 

6 "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 34. 



430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



people employed, * and the alterations caused by all these in the 
mode of conducting the wholesale trade. 2 But for all that, capi- 
tal never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is ad- 
mitted over and over again by its own representatives — except 
"under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament" 3 for the com- 
pulsory regulation of the hours of labour. 

SECTION 9.— THE FACTORY ACTS. 

SANITARY AND EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES OF THE SAME. 

THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN ENGLAND 

Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical re- 
action of society against the spontaneously developed form of 
the process of production, is, as we have seen, just as much the 
necessary product of modern industry as cotton yarn, self-actors, 
and the electric telegraph. Before passing to the consideration of 
the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly no- 
tice certain clauses contained in the Factory Acts, and not relat- 
ing to the hours of work. 

Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the cap- 
italist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely mea- 
gre, and, in fact, limited to provisions for whitewashing the walls, 
for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, 
and for protection against dangerous machinery. In the third 
book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition of the mas- 
ters to those clauses which imposed upon them a slight expendi- 
ture on appliances for protecting the limbs of their workpeople, 



1 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under 
these circumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked longer than 
from 8 a. m. to 7 or 7.30 p. m., in making up. It is merely a question of extra 
hands and extra outlay. If some masters were not so greedy, the boys would 
not work late; an extra machine costs only £\6 or £18; much of such over- 
time as does occur is to be referred to an insufficiency of appliances, and a 
want of space." "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," p. 171, n. 35, 36, 38. 

2 1. c. A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the 
compulsory regulation of the hours of labour as a protection for the workpeople 
against the manufacturers, and for the manufacturers themselves against 
the wholesale trade, states: "The pressure in our business is caused by the 
shippers, who want, e.g., to send the goods by sailing vessel so as to reach 
their destination at a given season, and at the same time want to pocket the 
difference in freight between a sailing vessel and a steamship, or who select 
the earlier of two steamships in order to be in the foreign market before 
their competitors." 

3 "This could be obviated," says a manufacturer, "at the expense of an 
enlargement of the works under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament." 
1. c, p. x., n. 38. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 481 

an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring light on the Free- 
trade dogma, according to which, in a society with conflicting 
interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common weal 
by seeking nothing but his own personal advantage! One example 
is enough. The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax 
industry has very much extended, and that, with that extension, 
the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 
there were in that country 1,800 of these mills. Regularly in autumn 
and winter women and "young persons," the wives, sons, and daugh- 
ters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people totally 
unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed 
the rollers of the scutching mills with flax. The accidents, both as 
regards number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history 
of machinery. In one scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, 
there occurred between 1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and 
sixty mutilations; every one of which might have been pre- 
vented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of a few shillings. 
Dr. W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpat- 
rick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 1865: 
"The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fear- 
ful nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the 
trunk, and either involves death, or a future of wretched inca- 
pacity and suffering. The increase of mills in the country will, of 
course, extend these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon 
if they are brought under the legislature. I am convinced that by 
proper supervision of scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and 
limb would be averted." 1 

What could possibly show better the character of the capi- 
talist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for 
forcing upon it, by Acts of Parliament, the simplest appliances 
for maintaining cleanliness and health? In the potteries the 
Factory Act of 1864 "has whitewashed and cleansed upwards 
of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such 
cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this 
is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 
27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and 
often nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which ren- 
dered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, preg- 
nant with disease and death. The Act has improved the venti- 
lation very much." 2 At the same time, this portion of the Act 



1 1. c, p. xv., n. 72. sqq. 

2 "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. 127. 



482 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production, owing 
to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a 
certain point. It has been stated over and over again that the 
English doctors are unanimous in declaring that where the work is 
continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space that should be 
allowed for each person. Now, if the Factory Acts, owing to their 
compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of small 
workshops into factories, thus indirectly attacking the proprieta- 
ry rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to 
the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the prop- 
er space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small 
employers would, atone full swoop, be expropriated directly! The 
very root of the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self- 
expansion of all capital, large or small, by means of the "free" 
purchase and consumption of labour-power, would be attacked. 
Factory legislation is therefore brought to a dead-lock before 
these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The sanitary officers, 
the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all 
harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500 cu- 
bic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of 
capital. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other 
lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary conditions to 
the existence of capital. 1 

Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the 
whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indis- 
pensable condition to the employment of children. 2 The suc- 
cess of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of 



1 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of 
average intensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic 
inches of air are consumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each 
minute. Hence the air inhaled in 24 hours by each individual is about 720,000 
cubic inches, or 416 cubic feet. It is clear, however, that air which has been 
once breathed, can no longer serve for the same process until it has been 
purified in the great workshop of Nature. According to the experiments of 
Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy man gives off about 1,300 
cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour; this would give about 8 ounces of 
solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24 hours. "Every man should 
have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.) 

2 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their chil- 
dren under 14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act, unless 
at the same time they allow them to receive elementary education. The 
manufacturer is responsible for compliance with the Act. "Factory education 
is compulsory, and it is a condition of labour." ("Rep. Insp Fact. 31st Oct., 
1865," p. 111.) 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 483 

combining education and gymnastics 1 with manual labour, and, 
consequently, of combining manual labour with education and 
gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out by ques- 
tioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although 
receiving only one half the education of the regular day schol- 
ars, yet learnt quite as much and often more. "This can be account- 
ed for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one 
half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly always ready 
and willing to receive instruction. The system on which they work, 
half manual labour, and half school, renders each employment a 
rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more con- 
genial to the child, than would be the case were he kept constantly 
at one. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the 
morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who 
comes fresh and bright from his work." 2 Further information on 
this point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science 
Congress at Edinburgh in 1863. He there shows, amongst other 
things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school hours of 
the children of the upper and middle classes, uselessly add to 
the labour of the teacher, "while he not only fruitlessly but ab- 
solutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and energy of the 
children." 3 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen 



1 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and 
drilling in the case of boys) with compulsory education for factory children 
and pauper scholars, see the speech of N. W. Senior at the seventh annual con- 
gress of "The National Association for the Promotion of Social Science." in 
"Report of Proceedings, &amp;c," Lond. 1863, pp 63, 64, also the "Rep. Insp. 
Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. 118, 119, 120, 126, sqq. 

2 "Rep. Insp. Fact. 31st Oct., 1865," p. 118. A silk manufacturer naively 
states to the Children's Employment Commissioners: "I am quite sure that 
the true secret of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting 
education and labour from a period of childhood. Of course the occupation 
must not be too severe, nor irksome, or unhealthy. But of the advantage of 
the union I have no doubt. I wish my own children could have some work as 
well as play to give variety to their schooling." ("Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.," 
p. 82, n. 36.) 

3 Senior, I. c.,p. 66. How Modern Industry, when it has attained to a 
certain pitch, is capable, by the revolution it effects in the mode of production 
and in the social conditions of production, of also revolutionising people's 
minds, is strikingly shown by a comparison of Senior's speech in 1863, with 
his philippic against the Factory Act of 1833; or by a comparison, of the views 
of the congress above referred to, with the fact that in certain country dis- 
tricts of England poor parents are forbidden, on pain of death by starvation, 
to educate their children. Thus, e.g., Mr. Snell reports it to be a common oc- 
currence in Somersetshire that, when a poor person claims parish relief, he 
is compelled to take his children from school. Mr. Wollarton, the clergyman 



484 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future, 
an education that will, in the case of every child over a given age, 
combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not 
only as one of the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, 
but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings. 

Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by techni- 
cal means the manufacturing division of labour, under which 
each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single detail- 
operation. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that industry 
reproduces this same division of labour in a still more monstrous 
shape; in the factory proper, by converting the workman into 
a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside the 
Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery and machine 
workers, * partly by re-establishing the division of labour on a 
fresh basis by the general introduction of the labour of women 
and children, and of cheap unskilled labour. 

The antagonism between the manufacturing division of 
labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself forci- 
bly felt. It manifests itself, amongst other ways, in the fright- 
ful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern fac- 
tories and manufactures, are from their earliest years riveted to 
the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without 
being taught a single sort of work that would afterwards make 
them of use, even in the same manufactory or factory. In the Eng- 
lish letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly 
a system, corresponding to that in the old manufactures and 
handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and 
more difficult work. They went through a course of teaching till 
they were finished printers. To be able to read and write was for 
every one of them a requirement of their trade. All this was 



at Feltham, also tells of cases where all relief was denied to certain families 
"because they were sending their children to school!" 

1 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or 
indirectly with more developed machines driven by mechanical power, a 
great change takes place with regard to the labourer who drives the machine. 
At first the steam-engine replaces this labourer, afterwards he must replace 
the steam-engine. Consequently the tension and the amount of labour-power 
expended become monstrous, and especially so in the case of the children who 
are condemned to this torture. Thus Mr. Longe, one of the commissioners, 
found in Coventry and the neighbourhood boys of from 10 to 15 years em- 
ployed in driving the ribbon-looms, not to mention younger children who 
had to drive smaller machines. "It is extraordinarily fatiguing work. The 
boy is a mere substitute for steam power." ("Ch. Empl Comm. V. Rep. 
1866," p. 114, n. 6.) As to the fatal consequences of "this system of slavery," 
as the official report styles it, see I. c, p. 114 sqq. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 485 

changed by the printing machine. It employs two sorts of labour- 
ers, one grown up, tenters, the other, boys mostly from 11 to 17 
years of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of 
paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. 
They perform this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, 
and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and 
frequently for 36 hours, with only 2 hours' rest for meals and 
sleep. 1 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, 
utter savages and very extraordinary creatures. "To qualify them 
for the work which they have to do, they require no intellectual 
training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for judgment; 
their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase propor- 
tionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look 
for advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of 
machine minder, because while each machine has but one minder, 
it has at least two, and often four boys attached to it." 2 As soon 
as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at the 
latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments. They 
become recruits of crime. Several attempts to procure them em- 
ployment elsewhere, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance 
and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation. 

As with the division of labour in the interior of the manu- 
facturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in 
the interior of society. So long as handicraft and manufacture 
form the general groundwork of social production, the subjection 
of the producer to one branch exclusively, the breaking up of 
the multifariousness of his employment, 3 is a necessary step 
in the development. On that groundwork each separate branch 
of production acquires empirically the form that is technically 
suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of 
maturity has been reached, rapidly crystallises that form. The 
only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw 



1 1. c, p. 3, n. 24. 

2 1. c, p. 7, n. 60. 

3 "In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, not many years ago, 
every peasant, according to the Statistical Account, made his own shoes 
of leather tanned by himself. Many a shepherd and cottar too with his wife 
and children, appeared at Church in clothes which had been touched by no 
hands but their own, since they were shorn from the sheep and sown in the 
flaxfield. In the preparation of these, it is added, scarcely a single article had 
been purchased, except the awl, needle, thimble, and a very few parts of the 
iron-work employed in the weaving. The dyes, too, were chiefly extracted by 
the women from trees, shrubs and herbs." (Dugald Stewart's "Works," Ham- 
ilton's Ed., Vol. viii., pp. 327-328.) 



486 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



material supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the in^ 
struments of labour. But their form, too, once definitely settled 
by experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many 
cases handed down in the same form by one generation to 
another during thousands of years. A characteristic feature is, 
that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades 
were called "mysteries" (mysteres); 1 into their secrets none but 
those duly initiated could penetrate. Modern Industry rent the 
veil that concealed from men their own social process of pro- 
duction, and that turned the various, spontaneously divided 
branches of production into so many riddles, not only to outsid- 
ers, but even to the initiated. The principle which it pursued, 
of resolving each process into its constituent movements, with- 
out any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, 
created the new modern science of technology. The varied, appar- 
ently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial proc- 
esses now resolved themselves into so many conscious and sys- 
tematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given 
useful effects. Technology also discovered the few main funda- 
mental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity of the instru- 
ments used, are necessarily taken by every productive action of 
the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the most 
complicated machinery nothing but the continual repetition of 
the simple mechanical powers. 

Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing 
form of a process as final. The technical basis of that industry 
is therefore revolutionary, while all earlier modes of produc- 
tion were essentially conservative. 2 By means of machinery t 



1 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers" of Etienne Boileau, we find it 
prescribed that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had to 
swear "to love his brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their 
respective trades, not wilfully to betray the secrets of the trade, and besides, 
in the interests of all, not to recommend his own wares by calling the atten- 
tion of the buyer to defects in the articles made by others." 

2 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionising 
the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production and all 
the social relations. Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of 
production was on the contrary the first condition of existence for all earlier 
industrial classes. Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturb- 
ance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation, distin- 
guish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. Al! fixed, -tast-irozen relations, 
with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept 
away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All I fiat 
is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last com- 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 487 

chemical processes and other methods, it is continually causing 
changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also 
in the functions of the labourer, and in the social combinations 
of the labour-process. At the same time, it thereby also revolu- 
tionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly 
launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch 
of production to another. But if Modern Industry, by its very na- 
ture, therefore necessitates variation of labour, fluency of func- 
tion, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its 
capitalistic form, it reproduces the old division of labour with 
its ossified particularisations. We have seen how this absolute 
contradiction between the technical necessities of Modern Indus- 
try, and the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dis- 
pels all fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how 
it constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of la- 
bour, to snatch from his hands his means of subsistence, * and, 
by suppressing his detail-function, to make him superfluous. We 
have seen, too, how this antagonism vents its rage in the creation 
of that monstrosity, an industrial reserve army, kept in misery 
in order to be always at the disposal of capital; in the incessant hu- 
man sacrifices from among the working-class, in the most reckless 
squandering of labour-power, and in the devastation caused by 
a social anarchy which turns every economic progress into a 
social calamity. This is the negative side. But if, on the one hand, 
variation of work at present imposes itself after the manner of an 
overpowering natural law, and with the blindly destructive ac- 
tion of a natural law that meets with resistance 2 at all points, 
Modern Industry, on the other hand, through its catastrophes 
imposes the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of 



pelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations 
with his kind." (F. Engels und Karl Marx: "Manifest der Kommunistischen 
Partei." Lond. 1848, p. 5.) 

1 "You take my life 

When you do take the means whereby 1 live." 

Shakespeare. 

2 A French workman, on his return from San- Francisco, writes as 
follows: "1 never could have believed, that ( was capable ol working at the 
various occupations 1 was employed on in California. 1 was firmly convinced 
that I was fit for nothing but letter-press printing. . . . Once in the midst of 
this world of adventurers, who change their occupation as often as they do 
their shirt, egad, I did as the others. As mining did not turn out remunerative 
enough, I left it for the town, where in succession I became typographer, 
slater, plumber. &amp;c. In consequence of thus finding out that I am fit for any 
sort of work, 1 teel less oi amollusk and more of a man." (A. Corbon, "De 
l'enseignement professional," 2eme ed., p. 50.) 



488 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



production, variation of work, consequently fitness of the labourer 
for varied work, consequently the greatest possible development of 
his varied aptitudes. It becomes a question of life and death for 
society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning 
of this law. Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under pen- 
alty of death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, crippled by 
life-long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus 
reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the fully developed 
individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any change 
of production, and to whom the different social functions he per- 
forms, are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natu- 
ral and acquired powers. 

One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this 
revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural 
schools, and of "ecoles d'enseignement professional," in which 
the children of the working-men receive some little instruction 
in technology and in the practical handling of the various im- 
plements of labour. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre 
concession wrung from capital, is limited to combining elementary 
education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that 
when the working-class comes into power, as inevitably it must, 
technical instruction, both theoretical and practical, will take its 
proper place in the working-class schools. There is also no doubt 
that such revolutionary ferments, the final result of which is the 
abolition of the old division of labour, are diametrically opposed 
to the capitalistic form of production, and to the economic status 
of the labourer corresponding to that form. But the historical de- 
velopment of the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of pro- 
duction, is the only way in which that form of production can 
be dissolved and a new form established. "Ne sutor ultra crepi- 
dam" — this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer 
nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the 
steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working- 
jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. 1 

1 John Bellers, a very phenomenon in the history of Political Economy, 
saw most clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for abolishing the 
present system of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy 
and atrophy at the two opposite extremities of society. Amongst other things 
he says this: "An idle learning being little better than the learning of idle- 
ness . . . Bodily labour, it's a primitive institution of God . . . Labour 
being as proper for the bodies' health as eating is for its living; for what pains 
a man saves by ease, he will find in disease. . . . Labour adds oil to the 
lamp of life, when thinking inflames it. ... A childish silly employ" 
(a warning this, by presentiment, against the Basedows and their modern 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 489 

So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the 
labour in factories, manufactories, &amp;c, it is regarded as a mere 
interference with the exploiting rights of capital. But when it 
comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," 1 it is immedi- 
ately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, on parental 
authority. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected 
to shrink from taking this step. The force of facts, however, com- 
pelled it at last to acknowledge that modern industry, in over- 
turning the economic foundation on which was based the tradi- 
tional family, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also 
unloosened all traditional family ties. The rights of the children 
had to be proclaimed. The final report of the Ch. Empl. Comm. 
of 1866, states: "It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent 
throughout the whole of the evidence, that against no persons 
do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against 
their parents." The system of unlimited exploitation of chil- 
dren's labour in general and the so-called home-labour in particu- 
lar is "maintained only because the parents are able, without 
check or control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous pow- 
er over their young and tender offspring. . . . Parents must 
not possess the absolute power of making their children mere 
'machines to earn so much weekly wage.'. . . . The children and 
young persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably claim 
from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should 
be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their physi- 
cal strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and 
moral beings." 2 It was not, however, the misuse of parental au- 
thority that created the capitalistic exploitation, whether direct 
or indirect, of children's labour; but, on the contrary, it was 
the capitalistic mode of exploitation which, by sweeping away 
the economic basis of parental authority, made its exercise 
degenerate into a mischievous misuse of power. However terrible 
and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist system, of the 
old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern industry, by 
assigning as it does an important part in the process of production, 



imitators) "leaves the children's minds silly." ("Proposals for Raising a Col- 
ledge of Industry of all Useful Trades and Husbandry." Lond., 1696, pp. 12, 
14, 18.) 

1 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small workshops, as we have 
seen in the lace-making and straw-plaiting trades, and as could be shown 
more in detail from the metal trades of Sheffield, Birmingham, &amp;c. 

2 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. xxv., n, 162, and II. Rep., p. xxxviii., 
n. 285, 289, p. xxv., xxvi., n. 191. 



490 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young persons, and 
to children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for 
a higher form of the family and of the relations between the 
sexes. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Chris- 
tian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be 
to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient Greek, 
or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a 
series in historical development. Moreover, it is obvious that the 
fact of the collective working group being composed of individ- 
uals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable 
conditions, become a source of humane development; although 
in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where 
the labourer exists for the process of production, and not the 
process of production for the labourer, that fact is a pestiferous 
source of corruption and slavery. * 

The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for 
transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical 
spinning and weaving — those first creations of machinery — into 
a law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have 
seen, from the mode in which Modern Industry was historically 
developed. In the rear of that industry, the traditional form of 
manufacture, of handicraft, and of domestic industry, is entirely 
revolutionised; manufactures are constantly passing into the 
factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and lastly, 
the spheres of handicraft and of the domestic industries become, 
in a, comparatively speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of 
misery in which capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the 
wildest excesses. There are two circumstances that finally turn the 
scale: first, the constantly recurring experience that capital, so 
soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, compen- 
sates itself all the more recklessly at other points; 2 secondly, 
the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of compe- 
tition, i.e., for equal restrain on all exploitation of labour. 3 On 
this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. Messrs. Gooksley 
of Bristol, nail and chain, &amp;c, manufacturers, spontaneously 
introduced the regulations of the Factory Act into their business. 
"As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the 
Messrs. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their 
boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p. m. 



1 "Factory labour may be as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, 
and perhaps more so." ("Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. 129.) 

2 "Rep. Insp. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 27-32. 

8 Numerous instances will be found in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact." 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 491 

'This,' they naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it 
exhausts a portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to 
have the full benefit.'" 1 Mr. J. Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, 
London) states before the commissioners of the Gh. Empl. Gomm.: 
"He would sign any petition for it" (legislative interference). . . . 
"As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed 
his place, lest others should be working later than him and get- 
ting away his orders." 2 Summarising, the Gh. Empl. Comm. says: 
"It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories 
should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in 
the smaller places in their own branch of business were under 
no legislative restriction. And to the injustice arising from the 
unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would 
be created if the smaller places of work were exempt, would be 
added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers, of finding 
their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn off to the places 
of work exempt from legislation. Further, a stimulus would be 
given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which 
are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, 
education, and general improvement of the people." 3 

In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the 
Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and 
women, of which number about one half are exploited in small 
industries and by the so-called home-work. 4 It says, "But if 
it should seem fit to Parliament to place the whole of that large 
number of children, young persons and females under the protec- 
tive legislation above adverted to. . . . it cannot be doubted that 
such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only 



1 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. x., n. 35. 

2 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep.," p. ix., n. 28. 



8 I. c, p xxv., n. 165-167 As to the advantages of large scale, com- 
pared with small scale, industries, see "Ch. Empl. Comm., Ill Rep.," p 13, 
n 144, p. 25, n. 121, p. 26, n 125, p. 27, n. 140, &amp;c. 

4 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following: 
Lace-making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of wear- 
ing apparel with its numerous sub-divisions, artificial flower-making, shoe- 
making, hat-making, glove-making, tailoring, all metal works, from blast 
furnaces down to needleworks, &amp;c, paper-mills, glass-works, tobacco fac- 
tories, india-rubber works, braid-making (for weaving), hand-carpet-mak- 
ing, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of spindles and spools, 
letter-press printing, book-binding, manufacture of stationery (including 
paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &amp;c), rope-making, manufacture of jet 
ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by hand, Coventry weaving, 
salt works, tallow chandlers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit -making, 
various industries connected with timber, and other mixed trades. 



492 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

upon the young and the feeble, who are its more immediate 
objects, but upon the still larger body of adult workers, who 
would in all these employments, both directly and indirectly, 
come immediately under its influence. It would enforce 
upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their 
places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state; it would 
therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength 
on which their own well-being and that of the country so much 
depends; it would save the rising generation from that over- 
exertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions 
and leads to premature decay; finally, it would ensure them — at 
least up to the age of 13— the opportunity of receiving the 
elements of education, and would put an end to that utter igno- 
rance ... so faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant 
Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without the 
deepest pain, and a profound sense of national degradation. 1 

The Tory* Cabinet announced in the Speech from the Throne, 
on February 5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the In- 
dustrial Commission of Inquiry 2 into Bills. To get that far, 
another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been 
required. Already in 1840 a Parliamentary Commission of In- 
quiry on the labour of children had been appointed. Its Report, 
in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W. Senior, "the most 
frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part 
of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery, 
degradation and destruction ever presented.... It may be supposed 
that it describes the horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily 
evidence that those horrors continue as intense as they were. 
A pamphlet published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states 
that the abuses complained of in 1842, are in full bloom at the 
present day. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the 
morals and health 



1 1. c, p. XXV., n. 169. 

* Here (from "The Tory Cabinet. . . ." to "Nassau W. Senior") the English 
text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition. — Ed. 

2 The Factory Acts Extension Act was passed on August 12, 1867. It 
regulates all foundries, smithies, and metal manufactories, including ma- 
chine shops; furthermore glass-works, paper mills, gutta-percha and india- 
rubber works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing and book-binding 
works, and, lastly, all workshops in which more than 50 persons are em- 
ployed. The Hours of Labour Regulation Act, passed on August 17, 1867, 
regulates the smaller workshops and the so-called domestic industries. 

I shall revert to these Acts and to the new Mining Act of 1872 in 
Volume II. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 493 

of the children of the working-class, that this report lay unno- 
ticed for 20 years, during which the children, 'bred up without 
the remotest sign of comprehension as to what is meant by the 
term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natu- 
ral affection,' were allowed to become the parents of the present 
generation." 1 

The social conditions having undergone a change, Parlia- 
ment could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission 
of 1862, as it had done those of the Commission of 1840. Hence 
in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than 
a part of its reports, the earthenware industries (including the 
potteries), makers of paper-hangings, matches, cartridges, and 
caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts in force 
in the textile industries. In the Speech from the Throne, on 5th 
February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the in- 
troduction of Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the 
Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866. 

On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, 
and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received 
the Royal Assent; the former Act having reference to large indus- 
tries, the latter to small. 

The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron and copper mills, 
foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha 
works, paper mills, glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter- 
press printing (including newspapers), book-binding, in short 
to all industrial establishments of the above kind, in which 50 
individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less 
than 100 days during the year. 

To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the 
Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its 
interpretation clause, the following passages: 

"Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by 
way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the 
making any article or part of an article, or in, or incidental to, 
the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapt- 
ing for sale any article." 

"Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the 
open air or under cover, in which any handicraft is carried on 
by any child, young person, or woman, and to which and over 
which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman 
is employed, has the right of access and control." 



1 Senior, "Social Science Congress," pp. 55-58. 



494 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

"Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether 
for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein de- 
fined." 

"Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the 
custody of, or control over, any . . . child or young person." 

Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of chil- 
dren, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of 
the Act, subjects to fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, 
whether parent or not, but even "the parent of, or the person 
deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the con- 
trol over, the child, young person or woman." 

The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large 
establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of 
vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters. 

The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, 
remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local 
authorities who were charged with its execution. When, in 1871, 
Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order to confer 
it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose province it thus added by 
a single stroke more than one hundred thousand workshops, and 
three hundred brickworks, care was taken at the same time not 
to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned 
staff. 1 

What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, 
on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of 
the ruling classes, of adopting in principle measures so extraor- 
dinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of capital- 
istic exploitation; and on the other hand, the hesitation, the 
repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to the 
task of carrying those measures into practice. 

The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regu- 
lation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from 
others by the exceptional characteristic that the interests of land- 
lord and capitalist there join hands. The antagonism of these 
two interests had been favourable to Factory legislation, while 
on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient 
to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation on mines. 



1 The "personnel" of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant in- 
spectors and 41 sub-inspectors. Eight additional sub-inspectors were appoint- 
ed in 1871. The total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, 
and Ireland amounted for the year 1871-72 to no more than £25,347, inclu- 
sive of the law expenses incurred by prosecutions of offending masters. 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 495 

The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so 
terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, 
that to salve its conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 
1842, in which it limited itself to forbidding the employment 
underground in mines of children under 10 years of age and fe- 
males. 

Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, pro- 
vides that mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated 
specially for that purpose, and that boys between the ages 
of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a 
school certificate, or go to school for a certain number of 
hours. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridic- 
ulously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their 
powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed. 

One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the "Report 
from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &amp;c. Evi- 
dence, 23rd July, 1866." This Report is the work of a Parliamen- 
tary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, 
and authorised to summon and examine witnesses. It is a thick 
folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines 
to this effect; that the committee has nothing to say, and that 
more witnesses must be examined! 

The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the 
cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, 
where the advocate tries, by means of impudent, unexpected, 
equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to 
intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and to give a 
forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. In this inquiry 
the members of the committee themselves are the cross-exam- 
iners, and among them are to be found both mine-owners and 
mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners. 
The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital, 
not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For the sake of 
conciseness I have classified them. I may also add that every 
question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books. 

I.Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. 

In the mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, 
usually last 14 or 15 hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 
o'clock a. m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p. m. (n. 6, 452, 83). The adults 
work in two shifts, of eight hours each; but there is no alternation 
with the boys, on account of the expense (n. 80, 203, 204). The 
younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and shutting the 
ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones 



498 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &amp;c. (n. 122, 739, 
1747). They work these long hours underground until their 
18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper 
(n. 161). Children and young persons are at present worse treated, 
and harder worked than at any previous period (n. 1663-1667). 
The miners demand almost unanimously an act of Parliament 
prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14. 
And now Hussey Vivian (himself an exploiter of mines) asks: 
"Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty 
of the workman's family?" Mr. Bruce: "Do you not think it would 
be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where 
he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only 
a mother, to prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. 
a day for the good of the family? . . . You must lay down a 
general rule? . . . Are you prepared to recommend legislation 
which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 
14, whatever the state of their parents might be?" "Yes." (ns. 
107-110). Vivian: "Supposing that an enactment were passed 
preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would 
it not be probable that . . . the parents of children would seek 
employment for their children in other directions, for instance, 
in manufacture?" "Not generally I think" (n. 174). Kinnaird: 
"Some of the boys are keepers of doors?" "Yes." "Is there not gen- 
erally a very great draught every time you open a door or close it?" 
"Yes, generally there is." "It sounds a very easy thing, but it is 
in fact rather a painful one?" "He is imprisoned there just the 
same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois Vivian: "When- 
ever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?" "Yes, he can 
read, if ho finds himself in candles ... I suppose he would be 
found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind 
his business, he has a duty to perform, and he has to attend to 
it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down 
the pit." (ns. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160). 

II. Education. —The working miners want a law for the 
compulsory education of their children, as in factories. They 
declare the clauses of the Act of 1860, which require a school cer- 
tificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years 
of age, to be quite illusory. The examination of the witnesses on 
this subject is truly droll. "Is it (the Act) required more against 
the masters or against the parents?" "It is required against both 
I think." "You cannot say whether it is required' against one more 
than against the other?" "No; I can hardly answer that question." 
(ns. 115, 116). "Does there appear to be any desire on the part 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 497 

of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable 
them to go to school?" "No; the hours are never shortened for that 
purpose." (n. 137.) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say that the col- 
liers generally improve their education; have you any instances 
of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved 
their education, or do they not rather go back, and lose any ad- 
vantage that they may have gained?" "They generally become 
worse: they do not improve; they acquire bad habits; they get 
on to drinking and gambling and such like, and they go com- 
pletely to wreck." (n. 211.) "Do they make any attempt of the kind 
(for providing instruction) by having schools at night?" "There 
are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at 
those collieries a few boys do go to those schools; but they are so 
physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." 
(n. 454.) "You are then," concludes the bourgeois, "against educa- 
tion?" "Most certainly not; but," &amp;c. (n. 443.) "But are they (the 
employers) not compelled to demand them (school certificates)?" 
"By law they are; but I am not aware that they are demanded 
by the employers." "Then it is your opinion, that this 
provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally 
carried out in the collieries?" "It is not carried out." (ns. 443, 
444.) "Do the men take a great interest in this question (of edu- 
cation)?" "The majority of them do." (n. 717.) "Are they very anx- 
ious to see the law enforced?" "The majority are." (n. 718.) 
"Do you think that in this country any law that you pass . . . 
can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist in 
putting it into operation?" "Many a man might wish to object 
to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by 
it." (n. 720.) "Marked by whom?" "By his employers." (n. 721.) 
"Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a 
man who obeyed the law. . . ?" "I believe they would." (n. 
722.) "Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ 
a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or read?" "It is 
not left to men's option." (n. 123.) "Would you call for the inter- 
ference of Parliament?" "I think that if anything effectual is to 
be done in the education of the colliers' children, it will have 
to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament." (n. 1634.) "Would 
you lay that obligation upon the colliers only, or all the work- 
people of Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." (n. 
1636.) "Why should you distinguish them (colliery boys) from other 
boys?" "Because I think they are an exception to the rule." 
(n. 1638.) "In what respect?" "In a physical respect." (n. 1639.) 
"Why should education be more valuable to them than to other 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



classes of lads?" "I do not know that it is more valuable; but 
through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the 
boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday 
schools, or at day schools." (n. 1640.) "It is impossible to look at 
a question of this sort absolutely by itself?" (n. 1644.) "Is there a 
sufficiency of schools?"— "No" ... (n. 1646). "If the State 
were to require that every child should be sent to school, would 
there be schools for the children to go to?" "No; but I think if the 
circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcom- 
ing." (n. 1647.) "Some of them (the boys) cannot read and write 
at all, I suppose?" "The majority cannot. . . . The majority 
of the men themselves cannot." (ns. 705, 725.) 

III. Employment of women. —Since 1842 women are no 
more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface 
in loading the coal, &amp;c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and 
railway waggons, in sorting, &amp;c. Their numbers have consider- 
ably increased during the last three or four years, (n.1727.) 
They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the working 
miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years, (ns. 645, 
1779.) "What is the feeling among the working miners as to the 
employment of women?" "I think they generally condemn it." 
(n. 648.) "What objection do you see to it?" "I think it is degrad- 
ing to the sex." (n. 649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes 
... it is rather a man's dress, and I believe in some cases, it 
drowns all sense of decency." "Do the women smoke?" "Some do." 
"And I suppose it is very dirty work?" "Very dirty." "They get 
black and grimy?" "As black as those who are down the mines 
... I believe that a woman having children (and there are 
plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her chil- 
dren." (ns. 650-654, 701.) "Do you think that those widows could 
get employment anywhere else, which would bring them in as 
much wages as that (from 8s. to 10s. a week)?" "I cannot speak 
to that." (n. 709.) "You would still be prepared, would you," 
(flint-hearted fellow!) "to prevent their obtaining a livelihood 
by these means?" "I would." (n. 710.) "What is the general feeling 
in the district ... as to the employment of women?" "The 
feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more 
respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank . . . 
Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised 
as much as 10 tons of stuff a day." (ns. 1715, 1717.) "Do you think 
that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than 
the women employed in the factories?" ". . . the percentage of bad 
ones may be a little more . . . than with the girls in the fac- 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 499 



tories." (n. 1237.) "But you are not quite satisfied with the state 
of morality in the factories?" "No." (n. 1733.) "Would you prohibit 
the employment of women in factories also?" "No, I would not." 
{n. 1734.) "Why not?" "I think it a more honourable occupation 
for them in the mills." (n. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their 
morality, you think?" "Not so much as working on the pit bank; 
but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on 
its moral ground alone. The degradation, in its social bearing 
on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When these 400 or 
500 girls become colliers' wives, the men suffer greatly from this 
degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink." 
(n. 1736.) "You would be ob'liged to stop the employment of wom- 
en in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it 
in the collieries?" "I cannot speak for any other trade." (n. 1737.) 
"Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women em- 
ployed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed 
above ground in collieries?" "I have not ascertained anything as 
to that." (n. 1740.) "Can you see anything that makes a distinction 
between one class and the other?" "I have not ascertained that, but I 
know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state 
of things in our district. . ." (n. 1741.) "Would you interfere in 
every case with the employment of women where that employ- 
ment was degrading?" "It would become injurious, I think, in 
this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from 
the instruction of a mother . . ." (n. 1750.) "That equally applies 
to agricultural employments, does it not?" "Yes, but that is only 
for two seasons, and we have work all the four seasons " (n. 1751.) 
"They often work day and night, wet through to the skin, their 
constitution undermined and their health ruined." "You have not 
inquired into that subject perhaps?" "I have certainly taken note 
of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel 
to the effects of the employment of women on the pit bank. -. 5 
It is the work of a man ... a strong man." (ns. 1753, 1793, 
1794.) "Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better 
class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanise them- 
selves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down 
by them?" "Yes." (n. 1808.) After some further crooked questions 
from these bourgeois, the secret of their "sympathy" for widows, 
poor families, &amp;c, comes out at last, "The coal proprietor appoints 
certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it 
is their policy, in order to receive approbation, to place 
things on the most economical basis they can, and these 
girls are employed at from Is. up to Is. 6d. a day, where 



500 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a man at the rate of 2s. 6d. a day would have to be em- 
ployed." (n. 1816.) 

IV. Coroner's inquests.— "With regard to coroner's inquests 
in your district, have the workmen confidence in the pro- 
ceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?" "No; they have 
not." (n. 360.) "Why not?" "Chiefly because the men who are gen- 
erally chosen, are men who know nothing about mines and such 
like." "Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?" "Never 
but as witnesses to my knowledge." "Who are the people who are 
generally summoned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen 
in the neighbourhood . . . from their circumstances they are 
sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers . . . the 
owners of the works. They are generally men who have no knowl- 
edge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are called 
before them, and the terms which are used and such like." "Would 
you have the jury composed of persons who had been employed in 
mining?" "Yes, partly .... they (the workmen) think that the 
verdict is not in accordance with the evidence given generally." 
(ns. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375.) "One great object in summoning 
a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?" "Yes, I should think 
so." "Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they 
were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?" "I cannot 
see any motive which the workmen would have to act partially 
. . . they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations 
in connexion with the mine." "You do not think there would 
be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe 
verdicts?" "No, I think not." (ns. 378, 379, 380.) 

V. False weights and measures. —The workmen demand to 
be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead 
of by cubical contents of the tubs; they also demand protection 
against the use of false weights, &amp;c. (n. 1071.) "If the tubs were 
fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue working by giv- 
ing 14 days' notice?" "But if he goes to another place, there is 
the same thing going on there." (n. 1071.) "But he can leave that 
place where the wrong has been committed?" "It is general; wher- 
ever he goes, he has to submit to it." (n. 1072.) "Could a man leave 
by giving 14 days' notice?" "Yes." (n. 1073.) And yet they are 
not satisfied! 

VI. Inspection of mines.— Casualties from explosions are not 
the only things the workmen suffer from. (n. 234, sqq.) "Our 
men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the collie- 
ries . . . the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can 
scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for employment of any kind 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 501 

after they have been for a length of time in connexion with their 
work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am working, 
men have been obliged to leave their employment and come 
home in consequence of that . . . some of them have been 
out of work for weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the 
ventilation where there is not explosive gas . . . there is plenty 
of air generally in the main courses, yet pains are not taken to 
get air into the workings where men are working." "Why do you 
not apply to the inspector?" "To tell the truth there are many men 
who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being 
sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of apply- 
ing to the inspector." "Why; is he a marked man for having com- 
plained?" "Yes." "And he finds it difficult to get employment in 
another mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the mines in your neigh- 
bourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with 
the provisions of the Act?" "No; they are not inspected at all . . . 
the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been 
going seven years. . . In the district to which I belong there 
are not a sufficient number of inspectors. We have one old man 
more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries." 
"You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. 234, 241, 
251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) "But do you think it would 
be possible for Government to maintain such an army of inspectors 
as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without 
information from the men?" "No, I should think it would be next 
to impossible." . . . "It would be desirable the inspectors should 
come oftener?" "Yes, and without being sent for." (n. 280, 277.) 
"Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors 
examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift the re- 
sponsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of 
the collieries to the Government officials?" "No, I do not think 
that, I think that they should make it their business to enforce 
the Acts which are already in existence." (n. 285.) "When you 
speak of sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and 
of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?" "I would not have 
them inferior, if you could get them otherwise." (n. 294.) "Do you 
merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men 
as an inspector?" "A man who would knock about, and see that 
things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself." 
(n. 295.) "If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior class 
of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger 
from want of skill, &amp;c?" "I think not, I think that the Govern- 
ment would see after that, and have proper men in that position." 



502 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



(n. 297.) This kind of examination becomes at last too much even 
for the chairman of the committee, and he interrupts with the 
observation: "You want a class of men who would look into ail 
the details of the mine, and would go into all the holes and corners, 
and go into the real facts . . . they would report to the chief 
inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge to bear 
on the facts they have stated?" (ns. 298, 299.) "Would it not en- 
tail very great expense if all these old workings were kept venti- 
lated?" "Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at 
the same time protected." (n. 531.) A working miner objects to 
the 17th section of the Act of 1860; he says, "At the present time, 
if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, 
he has to report it to the mine-owner and the Home Secretary. 
After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over 
the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to refuse making 
any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner 
writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating 
five engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine- 
owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as ar- 
bitrator, or appoints arbitrators from them; now we think in that 
case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator." 
(n. 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a mine-owner: "But ... is 
this a merely speculative objection?" (n. 586.) "Then you have a 
very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?" "It is 
most certainly unjust and inequitable." (n. 588.) "Do not mining 
engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think 
that they are above making such a partial decision as you appre- 
hend?" "I do not wish to answer such a question as that with re- 
spect to the personal character of those men. I believe that in many 
cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not 
to be in their hands to do so, where men's lives are at stake." 
(n. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: 
"Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an 
explosion?" Finally, "Are not you workmen in Lancashire able 
to take care of your own interests without calling in the Govern- 
ment to help you?" "No." (n. 1042.) 

In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Brit- 
ain, and 12 inspectors. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calcu- 
lates (Times, 26th January, 1867), that putting on one side 
their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine can be 
visited but once in ten years by an inspector. No wonder that 
explosions have increased progressively, both in number and 
extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), during the last 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 503 

ten years. These are the beauties of "free" capitalist produc- 
tion!* 

The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that reg- 
ulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, 
and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible 
for so-called accidents. 

The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into 
the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and 
women, has published some very important reports. Several 
attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a 
modified form, to agriculture have been made, but have so far 
resulted in complete failure. All that I wish to draw attention 
to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the 
general application of those principles. 

If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades 
for the purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and 
body has become inevitable, on the other hand, as we have al- 
ready pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conver- 
sion of numerous isolated small industries into a few combined 
industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates 
the concentration of capital and the exclusive predominance of 
the factory system. It destroys both the ancient and the transi- 
tional forms, behind which the dominion of capital is still in 
part concealed, and replaces them by the direct and open sway 
of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct opposition 
to this sway. While in each individual workshop it enforces uni- 
formity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the im- 
mense spur which the limitation and regulation of the working- 
day give to technical improvement, the anarchy and the catas- 
trophes of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity of labour, 
and the competition of machinery with the labourer. By the 
destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last 
resort of the "redundant population," and with it the sole remaining 
safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. By maturing the 
material conditions, and the combination on a social scale of 
the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and 
antagonisms of the capitalist form of production, and thereby 
provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new 
society, the forces for exploding the old one. 1 



* This sentence has been added to the English text in conformity with 
the 4th German edition. — Ed. 

1 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, 
as before remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers with regard 



594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



SECTION 10.— MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE 

The revolution called forth by modern industry in agricul- 
ture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will 
be investigated later on. In this place we shall merely indicate 
a few results by way of anticipation. If the use of machinery in 
agriculture is for the most part free from the injurious physical 
effect it has on the factory operative, its action in superseding 



to the bearing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practi- 
cally made the factory system the sole foundation of his experiments, but 
also declared that system to be theoretically the starting-point of the social 
revolution. Herr Vissering, Professor of Political Economy in the University 
of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion of this when, in his "Handboek van 
Praktische Staatshuishoudkunde, 1860-62," which reproduces all the plati- 
tudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handicrafts against the fac- 
tory system. [Added in the 4th German edition. — The "hopelessly bewildering 
tangle of contradictory enactments" (S. 314) (present volume, p. 300) which 
English legislation called into life by means of the mutually conflicting Fac- 
tory Acts, the Factory Acts Extension Act and the Workshops' Act, finally 
became intolerable, and thus all legislative enactments on this subject were 
codified in the Factory and Workshop Act of 1878. Of course no detailed 
critique of this English industrial code now in effect can be presented here. 
The following remarks will have to suffice. The Act comprises: 

1) Textile Mills. Here everything remains about as it was: children more 
than 10 years of age may work 5*/ 2 hours a day; or 6 hours and Saturday off; 
young persons and women, 10 hours on 5 days, and at most 6^2 on Saturday. 

2) Non-Textile Factories. Here the regulations are brought closer than 
before to those of No. 1, but there are still several exceptions which favour 
the capitalists and which in certain cases may be expanded by special per- 
mission of the Home Secretary. 

3) Workshops, defined approximately as in the former Act; as for the 
children, young workers and women employed there, the workshops are about 
on a par with the non-textile factories, but again conditions are easier in details. 

4) Workshops in which no children or young workers are employed, but 
only persons of both sexes above the age of 18; this category enjoy still easier 
conditions. 

5) Domestic Workshops, where only members of the family are employed, 
in the family dwelling: still more elastic regulations and simultaneously the 
restriction that the inspector may, without special permission of the ministry 
or a court, enter only rooms not used also for dwelling purposes; and lastly 
unrestricted freedom for straw-plaiting and lace- and glove-making by mem- 
bers of the family. With all its defects this Act, together with the Swiss 
Federal Factory Law of March 23, 1877, is still by far the best piece of leg- 
islation in this field. A comparison of it with the said Swiss federal law is 
of particular interest because it clearly demonstrates the merits and demerits 
of the two legislative methods— the English, "historical" method, which in- 
tervenes when occasion requires, and the continental method, which is built 
up on the traditions of the French Revolution and generalises more. Unfor- 
tunately, due to insufficient inspection personnel, the English code is still 
largely a dead letter with regard to its application to workshops. — F.E.] 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 505 

the labourers is more intense, and finds less resistance, as we shall 
see later in detail. In the counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, 
for example, the area of cultivated land has extended very much 
within the last 20 years (up to 1868), while in the same period 
the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but 
absolutely. In the United States it is as yet only virtually that 
agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they 
allow of the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface, but 
do not actually expel the labourers employed. In 1861 the number 
of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture 
of agricultural machines was 1,034, whilst the number of agricul- 
tural labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines 
and steam-engines did not exceed 1,205. 

In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more 
revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it anni- 
hilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces 
him by the wage-labourer. Thus the desire for social changes, and 
the class antagonisms are brought to the same level in the country 
as in the towns. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agricul- 
ture are replaced by scientific ones. Capitalist production complete- 
ly tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agri- 
culture and manufacture in their infancy. But at the same time 
it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the 
future, viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of 
the more perfected forms they have each acquired during their 
temporary separation. Capitalist production, by collecting the 
population in great centres, and causing an ever-increasing 
preponderance of town population, on the one hand concentrates 
the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it dis- 
turbs the circulation of matter between man and the soil, i. e., 
prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by man 
in the form of food and clothing; it therefore violates the condi- 
tions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. By this action it 
destroys at the same time the health of the town labourer and 
the intellectual life of the rural labourer. * But while upsetting 



1 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish boors and 
emasculated dwarfs. Good heavens! a nation divided into agricultural and 
commercial interests, calling itself sane; nay, styling itself enlightened and 
civilised, not only in spite of, but in consequence of this monstrous and 
unnatural division." (David Urquhart, 1. c, p. 119.) This passage shows, at 
one and the same time, the strength and the weakness of that kind of criticism 
which knows how to judge and condemn the present, but not how to compre- 
hend it. 



506 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the naturally grown conditions for the maintenance of that circu- 
lation of matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a 
system, as a regulating law of social production, and under a form 
appropriate to the full development of the human race. In agri- 
culture as in manufacture, the transformation of production 
under the sway of capital, means, at the same time, the martyr- 
dom of the producer; the instrument of labour becomes the means 
of enslaving, exploiting, and impoverishing the labourer; the 
social combination and organisation of labour-processes is turned 
into an organised mode of crushing out the workman's individual 
vitality, freedom, and independence. The dispersion of the rural 
labourers over larger areas breaks their power of resistance while 
concentration increases that of the town operatives. In modern 
agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased productive- 
ness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at 
the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power 
itself. Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a prog- 
ress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing 
the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a 
given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of 
that fertility. The more a country starts its development on 
the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for 
example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. 1 Capital- 



1 See Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physi- 
ologie," 7.Aufiage, 1862, and especially the "Einleitung in die Naturgesetze 
des Feldbaus," in the 1st Volume. To have developed from the point of view 
of natural science, the negative, i.e., destructive side of modern agriculture, 
is one of Liebig's immortal merits. His summary, too, of the history of agri- 
culture, although not free from gross errors, contains flashes of light. It is, 
however, to be regretted that he ventures on such haphazard assertions as 
the following: "By greater pulverising and more frequent ploughing, the cir- 
culation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, and the surface exposed 
to the action of the atmosphere is increased and renewed; but it is easily seen 
that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to the labour 
spent on that land, but increases in a much smaller proportion. This law," 
adds Liebig, "was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his 'Principles of 
Pol. Econ.,' VoL I, p. 17, as follows: That the produce of land increases, 
cseteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers em- 
ployed' (Mill here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ri- 
cardo's school, for since the 'decrease of the labourers employed,' kept 
even pace in England with the advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, 
and applied to, England, could have no application to that country, at all 
events), 'is the universal law of agricultural industry.' This is very remarkable, 
since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this law." (Liebig, 1. c, Bd. I., p. 143 
and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of the word "labour," 
by which word he understands something quite different from what Political 



MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 507 

ist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combin- 
ing together of various processes into a social whole, only by 
sapping the original sources of all wealth— the soil and the la- 
bourer. 



Economy does, it is, in any case, "very remarkable" that he should make 
Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory which was first 
published by James Anderson in A. Smith's days, and was repeated in 
various works down to the beginning of the 19th century; a theory which 
Malthus, that master in plagiarism (the whole of his population theory 
is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to himself in 1815; which West 
developed at the same time as, and independently of, Anderson; which in 
the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the general theory of value, 
then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 1820 was 
vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John Stuart Mill; and which, 
finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already 
quite commonplace, and known to every schoolboy. It cannot be denied 
that John Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, "remarkable" authority almost 
entirely to such quid-pro-quos. 



508 



PART Y 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE 
AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 



CHAPTER XVI 
ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 

In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter VII.) 
by treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical forms, 
as a process between man and Nature. We there stated, p. 181: 
"If we examine the whole labour-process, from the point of view 
of its result, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject 
of labour are means of production, and that the labour itself is 
productive labour." And in Note 2, same page, we further added: 
"This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- 
process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly 
applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production." 
We now proceed to the further development of this subject. 

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the 
same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on 
become separated. When an individual appropriates natural 
objects for his livelihood, no one controls him but himself. Aft- 
erwards he is controlled by others. A single man cannot operate 
upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the 
control of his own brain. As in the natural body head and hand 
wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of 
the hand with that of the head. Later on they part company and 
even become deadly foes. The product ceases to be the direct 
product of the individual, and becomes a social product, pro- 
duced in common by a collective labourer, i.e., by a combination 
of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or less, in 
the manipulation of the subject of their labour. As the co- 
operative character of the labour-process becomes more and more 
marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of pro- 
ductive labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become 
extended. In order to labour productively, it is no longer neces- 



ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 509 

sary for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an 
organ of the collective labourer, and perform one of its subordi- 
nate functions. The first definition given above of productive 
labour, a definition deduced from the very nature of the produc- 
tion of material objects, still remains correct for the collective 
labourer, considered as a whole. But it no longer holds good for 
each member taken individually. 

On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour 
becomes narrowed. Capitalist production is not merely the pro- 
duction of commodities, it is essentially the production of sur- 
plus-value. The labourer produces, not for himself, but for capital. 
It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce. 
He must produce surplus-value. That labourer alone is produc- 
tive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and thus 
works for the self-expansion of capital. If we may take an example 
from outside the sphere of production of material objects, a 
schoolmaster is a productive labourer, when, in addition to bela- 
bouring the heads of his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich 
the school proprietor. That the latter has laid out his capital in 
a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter 
the relation. Hence the notion of a productive labourer implies 
not merely a relation between work and useful effect, between 
labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation 
of production, a relation that has sprung up historically and 
stamps the labourer as the direct means of creating surplus-value. 
To be a productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but 
a misfortune. In Book IV. which treats of the history of the theory, 
it will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value 
has at all times been made, by classical political economists, the 
distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer. Hence 
their definition of a productive labourer changes with their com- 
prehension of the nature of surplus-value. Thus the Physiocrats 
insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone, 
they say, yields a surplus-value. And they say so because, with 
them, surplus-value has no existence except in the form of rent. 

The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at 
which the labourer would have produced just an equivalent for 
the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of that sur- 
plus-labour by capital, this is production of absolute surplus-value. 
It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the 
starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value. The 
latter pre-supposes that the working-day is already divided into 
'wo parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. In order to 



510 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by 
methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is produced in less 
time. The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively 
upon the length of the working-day; the production of relative 
surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes 
of labour, and the composition of society. It therefore pre-supposes 
a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode which, 
along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and devel- 
ops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal 
subjection of labour to capital. In the course of this development, 
the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour 
to capital. 

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, 
in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from 
the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected 
to capital. In such forms capital has not yet acquired the direct 
control of the labour-process. By the side of independent pro- 
ducers who carry on their handicrafts and agriculture in the tradi- 
tional old-fashioned way, there stands the usurer or the merchant, 
with his usurer's capital or merchant's capital, feeding on them 
like a parasite. The predominance, in a society, of this form of 
exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of production; to which 
mode, however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did 
towards the close of the middle ages. Finally, as is shown by 
modern "domestic industry," some intermediate forms are here and 
there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though 
their physiognomy is totally changed. 

It, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to 
capital suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, 
e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsmen who previously worked 
on their own account, or as apprentices of a master, should become 
wage-labourers under the direct control of a capitalist; so, on the 
other hand, we have seen, how the methods of producing relative 
surplus-value, are, at the same time, methods of producing abso- 
lute surplus-value. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the 
working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern 
Industry. Generally speaking, the specifically capitalist mode of 
production ceases to be a mere means of producing relative sur- 
plus-value, so soon as that mode has conquered an entire branch of 
production; and still more so, so soon as it has conquered all the 
important branches. It then becomes the general, socially pre- 
dominant form of production. As a special method of producing 
relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in so far 



ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 511 

as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally 
subject to capital, that is, so far as it is propagandist; secondly, 
in so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue 
to be revolutionised by changes in the methods of production. 

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and 
relative surplus-value appears illusory. Relative surplus-value is 
absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the work- 
ing-day beyond the labour-time necessary to the existence of the 
labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value is relative, since it makes 
necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, 
as will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to a 
portion of the working-day. But if we keep in mind the behaviour 
of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes. Once the 
capitalist mode of production established and become general, 
the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes 
itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of sur- 
plus-value. Assuming that labour-power is paid for at its value, 
we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness 
of labour and its normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can 
be raised only by the actual prolongation of the working-day; 
on the other hand, given the length of the working-day, that rise 
can be effected only by a change in the relative magnitudes of the 
components of the working-day, viz., necessary labour and sur- 
plus-labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the- 
value of labour-power, pre-supposes a change either in the produc- 
tiveness or in the intensity of the labour. 

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary 
means of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time 
left in which to work gratis for others. Without a certain de- 
gree of productiveness in his labour, he has no such superfluous 
time at his disposal; without such superfluous time, no surplus- 
labour, and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no feudal 
lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors. 1 

Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis;, 
but this is permissible only in the very general sense, that there 
is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man from dis- 
burdening himself of the labour requisite for his own existence,, 
and burdening another with it, any more, for instance, than 
unconquerable natural obstacles prevent one man from eating 



1 "The very existence o\ the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is 
dependent on the productiveness of industry." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 206.) 
"If each man's labour were but enough to produce his own food, there could 
be no property." (Ravenstone, 1. c, pp. 14, 15.) 



512 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the flesh of another. x No mystical ideas must in any way be 
connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically devel- 
oped productiveness of labour. It is only after men have raised 
themselves above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour 
has been to some extent socialised, that a state of things arises in 
which the surplus-labour of the one becomes a condition of exist- 
ence for the other. At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness 
acquired by labour is small, but so too are the wants which de- 
velop with and by the means of satisfying them. Further, at that 
early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour 
of others is infinitely small compared with the mass of direct 
producers. Along with the progress in the productiveness of 
labour, that small portion of society increases both absolutely 
and relatively. 2 Besides, capital with its accompanying relations 
springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long 
process of development. The productiveness of labour that serves 
as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not of Nature, but 
of a history embracing thousands of centuries. 

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the 
form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered 
by physical conditions. These are all referable to the constitution 
of man himself (race, &amp;c), and to surrounding Nature. The 
external physical conditions fall into two great economic classes, 
(1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, 
waters teeming with fish, &amp;c, and (2), natural wealth in the in- 
struments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood, 
metal, coal, &amp;c. At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class 
that turns the scale; at a higher stage of development, it is the 
second. Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient 
times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea. 

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling 
for satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil 
and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour- 
time necessary for the maintenance and reproduction of the 
producer. So much greater therefore can be the excess of his labour 
for others over his labour for himself. Diodorus long ago remarked 
this in relation to the ancient Egyptians. "It is altogether incred- 



1 According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 
cannibals in those parts of the earth which have already been explored. 

2 "Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the la- 
bourer's, 99 parts of a hundred are to be put upon the account of labour. In 
England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2 /.." ("The Advantages of the East 
India Trade, &amp;c," p. 73.) 



ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5l3 

ible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their 
children causes them. They cook for them the first simple food 
at hand; they also give them the lower part of the papyrus stem 
to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and 
stalks of marsh plants, some raw, some boiled and roasted. Most 
of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is 
so mild. Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents 
not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas. It is this, chiefly, 
which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, 
therefore, why so many great works can be undertaken." ' Never- 
theless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the 
extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that 
was freely disposable. Just as the individual labourer can do more 
surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, 
so with regard to the working population. The smaller the part 
of it which is required for the production of the necessary means 
of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to 
do other work. 

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circum- 
stances remaining the same, and given the length of the working- 
day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the physical 
conditions of labour, especially with the fertility of the soil. 
But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil 
is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion. This mode is based on the dominion of man over Nature. 
Where Nature is too lavish, she "keeps him in hand, like a child 
in leading-strings." She does not impose upon him any necessity 
to develop himself. 2 It is not the tropics with their luxuriant 
vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country 
of capital. It is not the mere fertility of the soil, but the differen- 
tiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes 



1 Diodorus, 1. c, J. I., c. 80. 

2 "The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so 
doth it make the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses; whereas 
the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy." ("England's 
Treasure by Foreign Trade. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule 
of our Treasure. Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now 
published for the common good by his son John Mun." London, 1669, pp. 181, 
182.) "Nor can T conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be 
thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food 
were, in great measure, spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted 
little care for raiment and covering . . . there may be an extreme on the 
other side. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that 
produces plentifully without any labour." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of 
the Present High Price of Provisions." Lond. 1767,' p. 10.) 



514 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



of the seasons, which form the physical basis for the social divi- 
sion of labour, and which, by changes in the natural surroundings, 
spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, 
his means and modes of labour. It is the necessity of bringing a 
natural force under the control of society, of economising, of 
appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of 
man's hand, that first plays the decisive part in the history of 
industry. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, 1 Lombardy, 
Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of 
artificial canals, not only supplies the soil with the water indis- 
pensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of sedi- 
ment from the hills, mineral fertilisers. The secret of the flour- 
ishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion 
of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. 2 

Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possi- 
bility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, 
of surplus-value and a surplus-product. The result of difference 
in the natural conditions of labour is this, that the same quantity 
of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of re- 
quirements, 3 consequently, that under circumstances in other re- 



1 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyp- 
tian astronomy, and with it the dominion of the priests, as directors of agri- 
culture. "Le solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la crue du Nil, et 
celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d'attention . . . 
C'etait cette annee tropique qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger 
dans leurs operations agricoles. lis durent done chercher dans le ciel un 
signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier: "Discours sur les revolutions du 
globe," ed. Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. 141.) 

2 One of the material bases of the power of the State over the small 
disconnected producing organisms in India, was the regulation of the water 
supply. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better than their 
English successors. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which 
cost the lives of more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the 
Bengal presidency. 

3 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the neces- 
saries of life in equal plenty, and with the same quantity of labour. Men's 
wants increase or diminish with the severity or temperateness of the climate 
they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of 
different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the 
same, nor is it practicable to ascertain the degree of variation farther than by 
the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may make this general conclu- 
sion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people 
is greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not 
only want more clothes, but the earth more cultivating than in the latter." 
("An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of Interest." Lond. 
1750, p. 59.) The author of this epoch making anonymous work is J. Massie. 
Hume took his theory of interest from it. 



ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5I5. 

spects analogous, the necessary labour-time is different. These 
conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.e., by 
fixing the points at which labour for others can begin. In pro- 
portion as industry advances, these natural limits recede. In the 
midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases 
the right to work for his own livelihood only by paying for it 
in surplus-labour, the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent 
quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. * But 
consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the- 
Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests. "When 
the inhabitants have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in 
the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and divided 
into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and 
filtered: it is then quite fit for use as sago. One tree commonly 
yields 300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people- 
go into the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with 
us they cut fire-wood." 2 Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter- 
requires 12 working-hours a week for the satisfaction of all his 
wants. Nature's direct gift to him is plenty of leisure time. Be- 
fore he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a 
whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it 
in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is necessary. If capi- 
talist production were introduced, the honest fellow would per- 
haps have to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to 
himself the product of one working-day. The bounty of Nature 
does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week, 
or why he must furnish 5 days of surplus-labour. It explains only 
why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a 
week. But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some- 
occult quality inherent in human labour. 

Thus, not only does the historically developed social pro- 
ductiveness of labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear- 
to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is 
incorporated. 

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus- 
value. He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of 
production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of so- 
cial production. Whenever he discusses the productiveness of 
labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the 



1 "Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et de- 
voirs du citoyen) laisser un excedant." Proudhon. 

2 F. Schouw: "Die Erde, die Pflanzen und der Mensch," 2. Ed. Leipz^ 
1854, p. 148. 



516 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

cause that determines the magnitude of that value. On the other 
hand, his school has openly proclaimed the productiveness of 
labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: surplus-value). 
This at all events is a progress as against the mercantilists who, 
on their side, derived the excess of the price over the cost of 
production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the 
product being sold above its value. Nevertheless, Ricardo's 
school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. In fact 
these bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that 
it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of 
the origin of surplus-value. But what are we to think of John 
Stuart Mill, who, half a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims 
superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the 
wretched evasions of Ricardo's earliest vulgarisers? 

Mill says: "The cause of profit is that labour produces more 
than is required for its support." So far, nothing but the old story; 
but Mill wishing to add something of his own, proceeds: "To 
vary the form of the theorem; the reason why capital yields a 
profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last longer 
than the time which was required to produce them." He here con- 
founds the duration of labour-time with the duration of its prod- 
ucts. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only 
a day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, 
as a machine maker whose products endure for 20 years and more. 
Of course it is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer 
than the time it takes in building, birds would have to do with- 
out nests. 

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes 
his own superiority over the mercantilists. "We thus see," he pro- 
ceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but 
from the productive power of labour; and the general profit of 
the country is always what the productive power of labour makes 
it, whether any exchange takes place or not. If there were no divi- 
sion of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but 
there would still be profit." For Mill then, exchange, buying 
and selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, 
are but an incident, and there would always be profits even with- 
out the purchase and sale of labour-power! 

"If," he continues, "the labourers of the country collectively 
produce twenty per cent, more than their wages, profits will be 
twenty per cent., whatever prices may or may -not be." This is, 
on the one hand, a rare bit of tautology; for if labourers produce 
a surplus-value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit will be to the 



ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 517 

total wages of the labourers as 20 : 100. On the other hand, it 
is absolutely false to say that "profits will be 20%." They will 
always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum total 
of the capital advanced. If, for example, the capitalist have 
advanced £500, of which £400 is laid out in means of production 
and £100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, 
the rate of profit will be 20 : 500, i.e., 4% and not 20%, 

Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of han- 
dling the different historical forms of social production. "I assume, 
throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers and 
capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions, 
universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole 
expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer." 
Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which 
as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth. But let us finish — 
Mill is willing to concede, "that he should do so is not a matter 
of inherent necessity."* On the contrary: "the labourer might 
wait, until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages 
whicn exceeds mere necessaries; and even for the whole, if he has 
funds in hand sufficient for his temporary support. But in the 
latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the 
concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for car- 
rying it on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that 
the labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of 
life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing but 
his own wage-labourer. He might also have said that the Ameri- 
can peasant proprietor is but a serf who does enforced labour 
for himself instead of for his lord. 

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production 
had no existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent 
enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even 
when it does exist. "And even in the former case" (when the work- 
man is a wage-labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the 
necessaries of life, he the labourer), "may be looked upon in the 
same light" (i.e., as a capitalist), "since, contributing his labour 
at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending 



* On the basis of a suggestion Marx made to N. F. Danielson (Niko- 
lai — on) in his letter of November 28, 1878, the part of this paragraph which 
begins with the words "Strange optical illusion" and ends with the words 
"inherent necessity" should read as follows: "Mr. Mill is willing to con- 
cede that it is not absolutely necessary for it to be so, even under an eco- 
nomic system where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes." 
— Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition. 



518 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



the difference (?) to his employer and receiving it back with in- 
terest, &amp;C." 1 In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratui- 
tously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive 
the market-price at the end of the week, &amp;c, and it is this which, 
according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. On the level 
plain, simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of 
the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its 
great intellects. 



J. St. Mill "Principles of Pol Econ ," Lond 1868, pp 252-53 passim. 



519 



CHAPTER XVII 

CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 

IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER 

AND IN SURPLUS-VALUE 

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the 
necessaries of life habitually required by the average labourer. 
The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch 
of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant 
magnitude. What changes, is the value of this quantity. There 
are, besides, two other factors that enter into the determination 
of the value of labour-power. One, the expenses of developing that 
power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, 
its natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of 
men and women, of children and adults. The employment of these 
different sorts of labour-power, an employment which is, in its 
turn, made necessary by the mode of production, makes a great 
difference in the cost of maintaining the family of the labourer, 
and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. Both 
these factors, however, are excluded in the following inves- 
tigation. l 

I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) 
that the price of labour-power rises occasionally above its value, 
but never sinks below it. 

On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes 
of surplus-value and of price of labour-power are determined by 
three circumstances; (1) the length of the working-day, or the 
extensive magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, 
its intensive magnitude, whereby a given quantity of labour 
is expended in a given time; (3) the productiveness of labour, 
whereby the same quantum of labour yields, in a given time, a 
greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the degree of 



1 Note in the 3rd German edition.— -The case considered at pages 316- 
319 is here of course omitted. — F. E. 



520 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



development in the conditions of production. Very different com- 
binations are clearly possible, according as one of the three fac- 
tors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one vari- 
able, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable. And the number 
of these combinations is augmented by the fact that, when these 
factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their 
respective variations may differ. In what follows the chief combi- 
nations alone are considered. 

I. LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY AND INTENSITY 
OF LABOUR CONSTANT, 
PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE 

On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the 
magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by three laws. 

(1.) A working-day of given length always creates the same 
amount of value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, 
and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single 
commodity produced, may vary. 

If the value created by a working-day of 12 hours be, say, 
six shillings, then, although the mass of the articles produced 
varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that 
the value represented by six shillings is spread over a greater or 
less number of articles. 

(2.) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in 
opposite directions. A variation in the productiveness of labour, 
its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite 
direction in the value of labour-power, and in the same direction 
in surplus-value. 

The value created by a working-day of 12 hours is a constant 
quantity, say, six shillings. This constant quantity is the sum 
of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which 
latter value the labourer replaces by an equivalent. It is self- 
evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts, neither 
of them can increase without the other diminishing. Let the two 
parts at starting be equal; 3 shillings value of labour-power, 
3 shillings surplus-value. Then the value of the labour-power 
cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the surplus-value 
falling from three shillings to two; and the surplus-value cannot 
rise from three shillings to four, without the value of labour- 
power falling from three shillings to two. Under these circum- 
stances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute mag- 
nitude, either of the surplus- value, or of the value of labour-power, 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 521 

without a simultaneous change in their relative magnitudes, 
i.e., relatively to each other. It is impossible for them to rise or 
fall simultaneously. 

Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and conse- 
quently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise in the produc- 
tiveness of labour. For instance, in the above case, the value of 
the labour-power cannot sink from three shillings to two, unless 
an increase in the productiveness of labour makes it possible to 
produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously 
required 6 hours to produce. On the other hand, the value of the 
labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without 
a decrease in the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours 
become requisite to produce the same quantity of necessaries, 
for the production of which six hours previously sufficed. It 
follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour 
causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise 
in surplus-value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such 
productiveness causes a rise in the value of labour-power, and 
a fall in surplus-value. 

In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; 
although a change in the magnitude of the surplus-value or sur- 
plus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magni- 
tude of the value of labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary 
labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same propor- 
tion. They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. But 
their proportional increase or diminution &gt; »depends on their origi- 
nal magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour 
took place. If the value of the labour-power be 4 shillings, or the 
necessary labour-time 8 hours, and the surplus-value be 2 shil- 
lings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an 
increase in the productiveness of labour, the value of the labour- 
power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6 hours, the 
surplus-value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus-labour to 
6 hours. The same quantity, 1 shilling or 2 hours, is added in one 
case and subtracted in the other. But the proportional change of 
magnitude is different in each case. While the value of the labour- 
power falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e., by -7- or 25%, the surplus-value 

rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by y or 50%. It therefore follows 

that the proportional increase or diminution in surplus-value, 
consequent on a given change in the productiveness of labour, 
depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the working- 



522 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



day which embodies itself in surplus-value; the smaller that 
portion, the greater is the proportional change; the greater that 
portion, the less is the proportional change. 

(3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always conse- 
quent on, and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution 
or increase in the value of labour-power. * 

Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is 
represented by a value of constant magnitude, since, to every 
variation in Che magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds 
an inverse variation in the value of labour-power, and since 
the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence 
of a change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, 
under these conditions, that every change of magnitude in sur- 
plus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the value 
of labour-power. If, then, as we have already seen, there can be 
no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour-power, 
and in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a change in their rela- 
tive magnitudes, so now it follows that no change in their relative 
magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute 
magnitude of the value of labour-power. 

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of sur- 
plus-value, pre-supposes a movement in the value of labour-power, 
which movement is brought about by a variation in the produc- 
tiveness of labour. The limit of this change is given by the altered 
value of labour-power. Nevertheless, even when circumstances 
allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur. For 
example: if in consequence of the increased productiveness of 
labour, the value of labour-power fall from 4 shillings to 3, or the 
necessary labour-time from 8 hours to 6, the price of labour-power 
may possibly not fall below 3s. 8d., 3s. 6d., or 3s. 2d., and the 
surplus-value consequently not rise above 3s. 4d., 3s. 6d., or 
3s. lOd. The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which is 3 
shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends on the relative 



1 To this third law MacGulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd 
addition, that a rise in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value 
of labour-power, can occur through the abolition of taxes payable by the cap- 
italist. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quanti- 
ty of surplus-value that the capitalist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. 
It alters only the proportion in which that surplus-value is divided between 
himself and third persons. It consequently makes no alteration whatever in 
the relation between surplus-value and value of labour-power. MacGulloch's 
exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune 
that as often happens to him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to 
J. B. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith. 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 523 

weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and 
the resistance of the labourer on the other, throws into the 
scale. 

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a 
given quantity of necessaries. It is the value and not the mass 
of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. 
It is, however, possible that, owing to an increase of produc- 
tiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may simultaneously 
be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, 
without any change in the price of labour-power or in surplus-value. 
If the value of labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary 
labour-time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus-value likewise 
be 3 shillings, and the surplus-labour 6 hours, then if the pro- 
ductiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio 
of necessary labour to surplus-labour, there would be no change 
of magnitude in surplus-value and price of labour-power. The 
only result would be that each of them would represent twice as 
many use-values as before; these use-values being twice as cheap as 
before. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, 
it would be above its value. If, however, the price of labour- 
power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible point con- 
sistent with its new value, but to 2s. lOd. or 2s. 6d., still this 
lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. 
In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness 
of labour, for the price of labour-power to keep on falling, 
and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in the 
mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. But even in such 
case, the fall in the value of labour-power would cause a corre- 
sponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between 
the labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep 
widening. x 

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three 
laws we have above stated. But he falls into the following errors: 
(1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws 
hold good as the general and sole conditions of capitalist produc- 
tion. He knows no change, either in the length of the working-day, 
or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be 



1 "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and 
that either more or less is produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, 
the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst the quantity, which that 
proportion represents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst 
the proportion remains the same." ("Outlines of Political Economy, &amp;c.," 
p. 67.) 



524 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

only one variable factor, viz., the productiveness of labour; 
(2), and this error vitiates his analysis much more than (1), 
he has not, any more than have the other economists, investi- 
gated surplus-value as such, i.e., independently of its particular 
forms, such as profit, rent, &amp;c. He therefore confounds together 
the laws of the rate of surplus-value and the laws of the rate of 
profit. The rate of profit is, as we have already said, the ratio 
of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced; the rate of 
surplus-value is the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable 
part of that capital. Assume that a capital G of £500 is made up 
of raw material, instruments of labour, &amp;c. (c) to the amount 
of £400; and of wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that 
the surplus-value (s) =£100. Then we have rate of surplus-value 

i-=|i^=100%. But the rate of profit ^=|i^=20%. It is, 

besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circum- 
stances that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. I shall 
show in Book III. that, with a given rate of surplus-value, we 
may have any number of rates of profit, and that various rates of 
surplus-value may, under given conditions, express themselves 
in a single rate of profit. 

II. WORKING-DAY CONSTANT. 

PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR CONSTANT. 

INTENSITY OF LABOUR VARIABLE 

Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure 
of labour in a given time. Hence a working-day of more intense 
labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense 
labour, the length of each day being the same. Increased produc- 
tiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more products in 
a given working-day. But in this latter case, the value of each 
single product falls, for it costs less labour than before; in the 
former case, that value remains unchanged, for each article costs 
the same labour as before. Here we have an increase in the number 
of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their individual prices: 
as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices. But in 
the case of increased productiveness, a given value is spread over 
a greater mass of products. Hence the length of the working-day 
being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be in- 
corporated in an increased value, and, the value of money remain^ 
ing unchanged, in more money. The value created varies with 
the extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 525 

normal intensity in the society. A given working-day, therefore, 
no longer creates a constant, but a variable value; in a day of 
12 hours of ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 6 shillings, 
but with increased intensity, the value created may be 7, 8, or 
more shillings. It is clear that, if the value created by a day's 
labour increases from, say, 6 to 8 shillings, then the two parts 
into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour-power and 
surplus-value, may both of them increase simultaneously, and 
either equally or unequally. They may both simultaneously in- 
crease from 3 shillings to 4. Here, the rise in the price of labour- 
power does not necessarily imply that the price has risen above 
the value of labour-power. On the contrary, the rise in price may 
be accompanied by a fall in value. This occurs whenever the 
rise in the price of labour-power does not compensate for its in- 
creased wear and tear. 

We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the 
productiveness of labour does not cause any change in the value 
of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus- 
value, unless the products of the industries affected are articles 
habitually consumed by the labourers. In the present case this 
condition no longer applies. For when the variation is either in 
the duration or in the intensity of labour, there is always a cor- 
responding change in the magnitude of the value created, inde-, 
pendently of the nature of the article in which that value is 
embodied. 

If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously 
and equally in every branch of industry, then the new and higher 
degree of intensity would become the normal degree for the so- 
ciety, and would therefore cease to be taken account of. But still, 
even then, the intensity of labour would be different in different 
countries, and would modify the international application of the 
law of value. The more intense working-day of one nation would be 
represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense 
day of another nation. * 



1 "All things being equal, the English manufacturer can turn out a con- 
siderably larger amount of work in a given time than a foreign manufacturer, 
so much as to counterbalance the difference of the working-days, between 
60 hours a week here, and 72 or 80 elsewhere." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 
31st Oct. 1855," p. 65.) The most infallible means for reducing this quali- 
tative difference between the English and Continental working-hour would be 
a law shortening quantitatively the length of the working-day in Continental 
factories. 



526 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



III. PRODUCTIVENESS AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT. 
LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY VARIABLE 

The working-day may vary in two ways. It may be made 
either longer or shorter. From our present data, and within the 
limits of the assumptions made on p. 520 we obtain the following 
laws: 

(1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of 
value in proportion to its length — thus, a variable and not 
a constant quantity of value. 

(2.) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of 
surplus-value and of the value of labour-power arises from a 
change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and 
consequently of the surplus-value. 

(3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in 
consequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of sur- 
plus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. Every change 
in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, 
of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value. 

We begin with the case in which the working-day is short- 
ened. 

(1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions 
given above, leaves the value of labour-power, and with it, the 
necessary labour-time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus-labour 
and surplus-value. Along with the absolute magnitude of the 
latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude rela- 
tively to the value of labour-power whose magnitude remains 
unaltered. Only by lowering the price of labour-power below its 
value could the capitalist save himself harmless. 

All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working- 
day, assume that it takes place under the conditions we have 
here supposed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the 
case: a change in the productiveness and intensity of labour 
either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening of the 
working-day. * 

(2.) Lengthening of the working-day. Let the necessary 
labour-time be 6 hours, or the value of labour-power 3 shillings; 
also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value 3 
shillings. The whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours 
and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. If, now, the working- 

1 "There are compensating circumstances ... which the working of the 
Ten Hours' Act has brought to light." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 
1848," p. 7.) 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 527 

day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power re- 
main unaltered, the surplus-value increases both absolutely 
and relatively. Although there is no absolute change in the value 
of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. Under the conditions 
assumed in I. there could not be a change of relative magnitude 
in the value of labour-power without a change in its absolute 
magnitude. Here, on the contrary, the change of relative magni- 
tude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of 
absolute magnitude in surplus-value. 

Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases 
with the length of that day, it is evident that the surplus-value 
and the price of labour-power may simultaneously increase, ei- 
ther by equal or unequal quantities. This simultaneous increase 
is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual lengthening of 
the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour 
unaccompanied by such lengthening. 

When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour- 
power may fall below its value, although that price be nominally 
unchanged or even rise. The value of a day's labour-power, is, as 
will be remembered, estimated from its normal average duration, 
or from the normal duration of life among the labourers, and 
from corresponding normal transformations of organised bodily 
matter into motion, x in conformity with the nature of man. Up 
to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, 
inseparable from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated 
by higher wages. But beyond this point the wear and tear in- 
creases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable 
for the normal reproduction and functioning of labour-power is 
suppressed. The price of labour-power and the degree of its 
exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities. 

IV. SIMULTANEOUS VARIATIONS IN THE DURATION, 
PRODUCTIVENESS, AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR 

It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here 
possible. Any two of the factors may vary and the third remain 
constant, or all three may vary at once. They may vary either 
in the same or in different degrees, in the same or in opposite 



1 "The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 
24 hours might be approximately arrived at by an examination of the chemi- 
cal changes which had taken place in his body, changed forms in matter indi- 
cating the anterior exercise of dynamic force." (Grove: "On the Correlation of 
Physical Forces.") 



528 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

directions, with the result that the variations counteract one 
another, either wholly or in part. Nevertheless the analysis of 
every possible case is easy in view of the results given in I., II., 
and III. The effect of every possible combination may be found 
by treating each factor in turn as variable, and the other two 
constant for the time being. We shall, therefore, notice, and that 
briefly, but two important cases. 

(1.) Diminishing productiveness of labour with 
a simultaneons lengthening of the working-day 

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here 
refer to diminution in those industries whose products determine 
the value of labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as 
results from decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corre- 
sponding dearness of its products. Take the working-day at 12 hours 
and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half re- 
places the value of the labour-power, the other forms the surplus- 
value. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness of the 
products of the soil, that, the value of labour-power rises from 
3 shillings to 4, and therefore the necessary labour-time from 
6 hours to 8. If there be no change in the length of the working- 
day, the surplus-labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus- 
value from 3 shillings to 2. If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, 
i.e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, 
the surplus-value at 3 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases 
compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by the 
necessary labour-time. If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., 
from 12 hours to 16, the proportional magnitudes of surplus-value 
and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour and necessary labour, 
continue unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus-value 
rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the surplus-labour from 6 hours 

to 8, an increment of 33-^-%. Therefore, with diminishing pro- 
ductiveness of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the 
working-day, the absolute magnitude of surplus-value may 
continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude 
diminishes; its relative magnitude may continue unchanged, 
at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, 
provided the lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may 
increase. 

In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of 
provisions led in PJngland to a nominal rise in wages, although 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 529 

the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. From 
this fact West and Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminu- 
tion in the productiveness of agricultural labour had brought 
about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they made this 
assumption of a fact that existed only in their imaginations, the 
starting-point of important investigations into the relative mag- 
nitudes of wage.-, profits, and rent. But, as a matter of fact, sur- 
plus-value had a* that time, thanks to the increased intensity 
of labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased 
both in absolute and relative magnitude. This was the period 
in which the right to prolong the hours of labour to an outrageous 
extent was established; 1 the period that was especially character- 
ised by an accelerated accumulation of capital here, by pauper^ 
ism there. 2 



1 "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious 
limit, beyond which they cannot be separated. With regard to the unusual 
exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness, which produce 
the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary 
Committee of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individ- 
uals, and certainly favour the growth of capital. But no man of humanity 
could wish to see them constant and unremitted. They are most admirable 
as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar 
kind would result from them, as from the population of a country being 
pushed to the very extreme limits of its food." (Malthus: "Inquiry into the 
Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815, p. 48, note.) All honour to Mal- 
thus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to 
which he elsewhere in his pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and 
others, in face of the most notorious tacts, make invariability in the length 
of the working day the groundwork of all their investigations. But the 
conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing 
that an unlimited prolongation of the working-day, combined with an 
extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of women 
and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working- 
class "supernumerary," particularly whenever the war should have ceased, 
and the monopoly of England in the markets of the world should have come 
to an end. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conform- 
ity with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true 
priest, to explain this "over-population" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather 
than by the historical laws of capitalist production. 

2 "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded 
from the greater exertions, and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring 
classes, the most numerous in every society. More women and children were 
compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations, 
and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater 
portion of their time to increase production." ("Essays on Pol.Econ., in which 
are Illustrated the Principal Causes of the Present National Distress." Lond., 
1830, p. 248.) 



530 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

(2.) Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with 
simultaneous shortening of the working-day 

Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, 
both have a like effect. They both augment the mass of articles 
produced in a given time. Both, therefore, shorten that portion 
of the working-day which the labourer needs to produce his means 
of subsistence or their equivalent. The minimum length of the 
working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of 
it. If the whole working-day were to shrink to the length of this 
portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly 
impossible under the regime of capital. Only by suppressing the 
capitalist form of production could the length of the working-day 
be reduced to the necessary labour-time. But, even in that case, 
the latter would extend its limits. On the one hand, because the 
notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and 
the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of 
life. On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus- 
labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour 
of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation. 

The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more 
can the working-day be shortened; and the more the working-day 
is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. From 
a social point of view, the productiveness increases in the same 
ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes not 
only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of 
all useless labour. The capitalist mode of production, while on the 
one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the oth- 
er hand, begets, by its anarchical system of competition, the most 
outrageous squandering of labour-power and of the social means of 
production, not to mention the creation of a vast number of employ- 
ments, at present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous. 

The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the 
time which society is bound to devote to material production 
is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the 
free development, intellectual and social, of the individual is 
greater, in proportion as the work is more and more evenly divid- 
ed among all the able-bodied members of society, and as a par- 
ticular class is more and more deprived of the power to shift the 
natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of an- 
other layer of society. In this direction, the shortening of the work- 
ing-day finds at last a limit in the generalisation of labour. In 
capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting 
the whole life-time of the masses into labour-time. 



531 



CHAPTER XVIII 

VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE 

OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by 
the following formulae. 

. Surplus-value / s\_ Surplus-value Surplus-labour 

Variable Capital \ v/~ Value of labour-power - Necessary labour 

The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, 
that which, in the third, is represented as a ratio of the times 
during which those values are produced. These formulae, supple- 
mentary the one to the other, are rigorously definite and correct. 
We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously, worked 
out in classical Political Economy. There we meet with the fol- 
lowing derivative formulae. 

T Surplus-labour Surplus-value _ Surplus-product 

Working-day ""Value of the Product - Total Product 

One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labour- 
times, of the values in which those labour-times are embodied, 
and of the products in which those values exist. It is of course 
understood that, by "Value of the Product," is meant only the 
value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of the 
value of the product being excluded. 

In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploita- 
tion of labour, or the rate of surplus-value, is falsely expressed. 
Let the working-day be 12 hours. Then, making the same assump- 
tions as in former instances, the real degree of exploitation of 
labour will be represented in the following proportions. 

6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. j/yy/ 
6 hours necessary labour - Variable Capital of 3 sh. 



532 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

From formulae II. we get very differently, 

6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. _ 

Working-day of 12 hours Value created of 6 sh.~ '• 

These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the pro- 
portion in which the working-day, or the value produced by 
it, is divided between capitalist and labourer. If they are to 
be treated as direct expressions of the degree of self-expansion 
of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Sur- 
plus-labour or surplus-value can never reach 100%. x Since the 
surplus-labour is only an aliquot part of the working-day, or since 
surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value created, the 
surplus-labour must necessarily be always less than the working- 
day, or the surplus-value always less than the total value created. 
In order, however, to attain the ratio of 100:100 they must 
be equal. In order that the surplus-labour may absorb the whole 
day (i.e., an average day of any week or year), the necessary la- 
bour must sink to zero. But if the necessary labour vanish, so 
too does the surplus-labour, since it is only a function of the for- 

m, .. Surplus-labour Surplus-value ., - 

mer. Ine ratio „, . . 3 or ., , —3- can therefore never 

Working-day Value created 

100 100-f-x 

reach the limit of 77^, still less rise to ,ZL . But not so the rate of 

100 100 

aurplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labour. Take, e.g., 



1 Thus, e.g., in "Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. 
Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre von der Grundrente und Begriindung 
einer neuen Rententheorie." Berlin, 1851. I shall return to this letter later on; 
in spite of its erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist 
production. [Added in the 3rd German edition. — It may be seen from this 
how favourably Marx judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real 
progress, or new and sound ideas. The subsequent publication of Rodbertus' 
letters to Rud. Meyer has shown that the above acknowledgment by Marx 
wants restricting to some extent. In those letters this passage occurs: "Capital 
must be rescued not only from labour, but from itself, and that will be best 
effected, by treating the acts of the industrial capitalist as economic and 
political functions, that have been delegated to him with his capital, and by 
treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know no other social 
organisation. But salaries may be regulated, and may also be reduced if 
they take too much from wages. The irruption of Marx into Society, as I 
may call his book, must be warded off... Altogether, Marx's book is not so 
much an investigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form 
of capital, a form which he confounds with the concept itself of capital."* 
("Briefe, &amp;c, von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, herausgg. von Dr. Rud. 
Meyer," Berlin, 1881, I. Bd. p. Ill, 48. Brief von Rodbertus.) To such ideo- 
logical commonplaces did the bold attack by Rodbertus in his "social let- 
ters" finally dwindle down.—/ 1 . E.] 



VARIOUS FORMULAE FOR RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 533 

the estimate of L. de Lavergne, according to which the English 
agricultural labourer gets only -7-, the capitalist (farmer) on the 

other hand — of the product * or of its value, apart from the ques- 
tion of how the booty is subsequently divided between the capi- 
talist, the landlord and others. According to this, the surplus- 
labour of the English agricultural labourer is to his necessary 
labour as 3 : 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 300%. 

The favourite method of treating the working-day as con- 
stant in magnitude became, through the use of the formulae II., 
a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labour is always compared 
with a working-day of given length. The same holds good when 
the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept in sight. 
The working-day that has already been realised in a given value, 
must necessarily be a day of given length. 

The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labour- 
power as fractions of the value created — a habit that originates 
in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import 
will hereafter be disclosed — conceals the very transaction that 
characterises capital, namely the exchange of variable capital 
for living labour-power, and the consequent exclusion of the 
labourer from the product. Instead of the real fact, we have the 
false semblance of an association, in which labourer and capi- 
talist divide the product in proportion to the different elements 
which they respectively contribute towards its formation. 2 

Moreover, the formulse II. can at anytime be reconverted into 

e , T T , - , Surplus-labour of 6 hours , 
formulae I. If, for instance, we have yj^— ^-. 3 c , , then 

' ' Working-day of 12 hours 

the necessary labour-time being 12 hours less the surplus-labour 
of 6 hours, we get the following result, 

Surplus-labour of 6 hours __100 
Necessary labour of 6 hours - 100 



1 That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital 
advanced, is of course left out in this calculation. Mr. L. de Lavergne, a 
blind admirer of England, is inclined to estimate the share of the capitalist 
too low, rather than too high. 

2 All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of co- 
operation, nothing is, of course, easier, than to make abstraction from their 
antagonistic character, and to transform them by a word into some form 
of free association, as is done by A. de Laborde in "De TEsprit d'Associa- 
tion dans tous les interets de la communaute." Paris 1818. H. Carey, theYan- 
kee, occasionally performs this conjuring trick with like success, even with 
the relations resulting from slavery. 



534 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

There is a third formula which I have occasionally already 
anticipated; it is 

Surplus-value _ Surplus-la bour _ Unpaid labour 

' Value of labour-power - Necessary labour - Paid labour 

After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer 
possible to be misled, by the formula p^id labour^ ' into conclud ~ 
ing, that the capitalist pays for labour and not for labour-power. 
This formula is only a popular expression for n^^^m The 

capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of 
the labour-power, and receives in exchange the disposal of the 
living labour-power itself. His usufruct is spread over two periods. 
During one the "labourer produces a value that is only equal to 
the value of his labour-power: he produces its equivalent. Thus 
the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the 
labour-power, a product of the same price. It is the same as if he 
had bought the -product ready made in the market. During the 
other period the period of surplus-labour, the usufruct of the 
labour-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no 
equivalent. 1 This expenditure of labour-power comes to him 
gratis. In this sense it is that surplus-labour can be called unpaid 
labour. 

Capital, therefore, is not only, as Adam Smith says, the com- 
mand over labour. It is essentially the command over unpaid 
labour. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, 
interest, or rent), it may subsequently crystallise into, is in sub- 
stance the materialisation of unpaid labour. The secret of the 
self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal 
of a definite quantity of other people's unpaid labour. 



1 Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of sur- 
plus-value, yet this much was clear to them, viz., that it is "une richesse 
independante et disponible qu'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et qu'il 
vend." (Turgot: "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses," 
p. 11.) 



535 



PART VI 

WAGES 



CHAPTER XIX 
TEE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE 
(AND RESPECTIVELY THE PRICE) 
OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES 

On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer 
appears as the price of labour, a certain quantity of money that 
is paid for a certain quantity of labour. Thus people speak of the 
value of labour and call its expression in money its necessary 
or natural price. On the other hand they speak of the market- 
prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or below its natural 
price. 

But what is the value of a commodity? The objective form 
of the social labour expended in its production. And how do we 
measure the quantity of this value? By the quantity of the labour 
contained in it. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 hours' work- 
ing-day to be determined? By the 12 working-hours contained 
in a working-day of 12 hours, which is an absurd tautology. x 

In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour 
must at all events exist before it is sold. But could the labourer 



1 "Mr. Ricardo, ingeniously enough, avoids a difficulty which, on a first 
view, threatens to encumber his doctrine, that value depends on the quantity 
of labour employed in production. If this principle is rigidly adhered to, it 
follows that the value of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed 
in producing it — which is evidently absurd. By a dexterous turn, therefore, 
Mr. Ricardo makes the value of labour depend on the quantity of labour re- 
quired to produce wages; or, to give him the benefit of his own language, he 
maintains, that the value of labour is to be estimated by the quantity of la- 
bour required to produce wages; by which he means the quantity of labour 
required to produce the money or commodities given to the labourer. This is 
similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the quantity 
of labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour bestowed 
on the production of the silver, for which the cloth is exchanged." ("A Critical 
Dissertation on the Nature, &amp;c, of Value," pp 50, 51.) 



536 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a com- 
modity and not labour. l 

Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, 
i.e., of realised labour, with living labour would either do away 
with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely 
on the basis of capitalist production, or do away with capitalist 
production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour. The 
working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money-value 
of 6s. Either equivalents are exchanged, and then the labourer 
receives 6s. for 12 hours' labour; the price of his labour would 
be equal to the price of his product. In this case he produces 
no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s. are not trans- 
formed into capital, the basis of capitalist production vanishes. 
But it is on tjiis very basis that he sells his labour and that his 
labour is wage-labour. Or else he receives for 12 hours' labour 
less than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. Twelve hours' 
labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &amp;c, hours' labour. This 
equalisation of unequal quantities not merely does away with 
the determination of value. Such a self-destructive contradiction 
cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law. 3 

It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour 
against less, from their difference of form, the one being realised, 
the other living. 3 This is the more absurd as the value of a com- 
modity is determined not by the quantity of labour actually real- 
ised in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its 
production. A commodity represents, say 6 working-hours. If an 
invention is made by which it can be produced in 3 hours, the 

1 "If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is 
first produced in order to exchange, and then brought to market where it 
must exchange with other commodities according to the respective quantities 
of each which there may be in the market at the time; labour is created the 
moment it is brought to market; nay, it is brought to market before it is 
created." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, etc.," pp. 75, 76.) 

2 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, 
as another, then, if the values of these two commodities were regulated by 
equal quantities of labour, a given amount of labour would ... exchange 
for that quantity of capital which had been produced by the same amount 
of labour; antecedent labour would ... exchange for the same amount as 
present labour. But the value of labour in relation to other commodities 
... is determined not by equal quantities of labour." (E. G. Wakefield in 
his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," vol. i., London, 1836, 
p. 231, note.) 

3 "II a fallu convenir (a new edition of the contrat social!) que toutes les 
fois qu'il echangerait du travail fait contre du travail a faire, le dernier (le 
capitaliste) aurait une valeur superieure au premier" (le travailleur). Simonde 
(i. e., Sismondi), "De la Richesse Commerciale," Geneve, 1803, t. 1, p. 37. 



VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAOES 537 

value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half. 
It represents now 3 hours of social labour instead of the 6 formerly 
necessary. It is the quantity of labour required for its production, 
not the realised form of that labour, by which the amount of the 
value of a commodity is determined. 

That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of 
money on the market, is in fact not labour, but the labourer. 
What the latter sells is his labour-power. As soon as his la- 
bour actually begins, it has already ceased to belong to him; 
it can therefore no longer be sold by him. Labour is the 
substance, and the immanent measure of value, but has itself no 
value. 1 

In the expression "value of labour," the idea of value is not 
only completely obliterated, but actually reversed. It is an ex- 
pression as imaginary as the value of the earth. These imagi- 
nary expressions, arise, however, from the relations of production 
themselves. They are categories for the phenomenal forms of 
essential relations. That in their appearance things often repre- 
sent themselves in inverted form is pretty well known in every 
science except Political Economy. 2 

Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the 
category "price of labour" without further criticism, and then sim- 
ply asked the question, how is this price determined? It soon 



1 "Labour the exclusive standard of value ... the creator of all wealth, 
no commodity". Th. Hodgskin, "Popul. Polit. Econ.," p. 186. 

2 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely 
poetic license only shows the impotence of the analysis. Hence, in answer to 
Proudhon's phrase; "Le travail est dit valoir, non pas en tant que marchandise 
lui-meme, mais en vue des valeurs qu'on suppose renfermees puissancielle- 
ment en lui. La valeur du travail est une expression figuree, " &amp;c, I have re- 
marked: "Dans le travail-marchandise qui est d'une realite effrayante, il 
(Proudhon) ne voit qu'une ellipse grammaticale. Done, toute la societe 
actuelle, fondee sur le travail-marchandise, est desormais fondee sur une 
license poetique, sur une expression figuree. La societe veut-elle 'eliminer 
tous les inconvenients,' qui la travaillent, eh bien! qu'elle elimine les 
termes malsonnant, qu'elle change de langage, et pour cela elle n'a qu'a 
s'adresser a l'Academie pour lui demander une nouvelle edition de son 
dictionnaire." (Karl Marx, "Misere de la Philosophic," pp. 34, 35.) It is natu- 
rally still more convenient to understand by value nothing at all. Then 
one can without difficulty subsume everything under this category. Thus, 
e.g., J. B. Say; what is "valeur"? Answer: "C'est ce qu'une chose vaut," 
and what is "prix"? Answer: "La valeur d'une chose exprimee en monnaie." 
And why has "le travail de la terre ... une valeur? Parce qu'on y met un 
prix." Therefore value is what a thing is worth, and the land has its "val- 
ue," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, anyhow, a very sim- 
ple way of explaining the why and the wherefore of things. 



538 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

recognised that the change in the relations of demand and supply 
explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other commodi- 
ties, nothing except its changes, i.e., the oscillations of the market- 
price above or below a certain mean. If demand and supply balance, 
the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the 
same. But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything. 
The price of labour, at the moment when demand and supply are 
in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of 
the relation of demand and supply. And how this price is deter- 
mined, is just the question. Or a larger period of oscillations in the 
market-price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel 
one the other, leaving a mean average quantity, a relatively con- 
stant magnitude. This had naturally to be determined otherwise 
than by its own compensating variations. This price which always 
finally predominates over the accidental market prices of labour 
and regulates them, this "necessary price" (physiocrats) or "natu- 
ral price" of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with all other commod- 
ities, be nothing else than its value expressed in money. In this 
way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the acciden- 
tal prices of labour, to the value of labour. As with other commodi- 
ties, this value was determined by the cost of production. But 
what is the cost of production — of the labourer, i.e., the cost of 
producing or reproducing the labourer himself? This question un- 
consciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original 
one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such 
turned in a circle and never left the spot. What economists there- 
fore call value of labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as 
it exists in the personality of the labourer, which is as different 
from its function, labour, as a machine is from the work it performs. 
Occupied with the difference between the market-price of labour 
and its so-called value, with the relation of this value to the rate 
of profit, and to the values of the commodities produced by means 
of labour, &amp;c, they never discovered that the course of the analy- 
sis had led not only from the market-prices of labour to its presumed 
value, but had led to the resolution of this value of labour itself 
into the value of labour-power. Classical economy never arrived 
at a consciousness of the results of its own analysis; it accepted un- 
critically the categories "value of labour," "natural price of labour, " 
&amp;c, as final and as adequate expressions for the value-relation un- 
der consideration, and was thus led, as will be seen later, into 
inextricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the 
vulgar economists a secure basis of operations for their shallow^ 
ness, which on principle worships appearances only. 



VALUE OP LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 539 

Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, pre- 
sent themselves in this transformed condition as wages. 

We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated 
upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to which, again, cor- 
responds a certain length of working-day. Assume the habitual 
working-day as 12 hours, the daily value of labour-power as 3s., the 
expression in money of a value that embodies 6 hours of labour. If 
the labourer receives 3s., then he receives the value of his labour- 
power functioning through 12 hours. If, now, this value of a day's 
labour-power is expressed as the value of a day's labour itself, we 
have the formula: Twelve hours' labour has a value of 3s. The 
value of labour-power thus determines the value of labour, or, ex- 
pressed in money, its necessary price. If, on the other hand, the 
price of labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the 
price of labour differs from its so-called value. 

As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for the 
value of labour-power, it follows, of course, that the value of la- 
bour must always be less than the value it produces, for the capi- 
talist always makes labour-power work longer than is necessary 
for the reproduction of its own value. In the above example, the 
value of the labour-power that functions through 12 hours is 3s., 
a value for the reproduction of which 6 hours are required. The 
value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s., 
because it, in fact, functions during 12 hours, and the value it pro- 
duces depends, not on its own value, but on the length of time it 
is in action. Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight— that 
labour which creates a value of 6s. possesses a value of 3s. 1 

We see, further: The value of 3s. by which a part only of the 
working-day — i.e., 6 hours' labour — is paid for, appears as the 
value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which thus 
includes 6 hours unpaid for. The wage-form thus extinguishes 
every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary la- 
bour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour. All labour 
appears as paid labour. In the corvee, the labour of the worker for 
himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and 
time in the clearest possible way. In slave-labour, even that part 
of the working-day in which the slave is only replacing the value 
of his own means of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he 



1 Cf. "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," p. 40, where I state that, 
in the portion of that work that deals with Capital, this problem will be 
solved: "How does production, on the basis of exchange-value determined 
simply by labour-time, lead to the result that the exchange-value of labour 
is less than the exchange-value of its product?" 



540 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

works for himself alone, appears as labour for his master. All 
the slave's labour appears as unpaid labour. 1 In wage-labour, on 
the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as 
paid. There the property-relation conceals the labour of the slave 
for himself; here the money-relation conceals the unrequited 
labour of the wage-labourer. 

Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the 
transformation of value and price of labour-power into the form 
of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. This phe- 
nomenal form, which makes the actual relation invisible, and, 
indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms the basis 
of all the juridical notions of both labourer and capitalist, of all 
the mystifications of the capitalistic mode of production, of all 
its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic shifts of the vul- 
gar economists. 

If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery 
of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is more easy to understand 
than the necessity, the raison d'etre, of this phenomenon. 

The exchange between capital and labour at first presents 
itself to the mind in the same guise as the buying and selling of 
all other commodities. The buyer gives a certain sum of money, 
the seller an article of a nature different from money. The jurist's 
consciousness recognises in this, at most, a material difference, ex- 
pressed in the juridically equivalent formulae: "Do ut des, do ut 
facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias." 

Further. Exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically 
incommensurable magnitudes, the expressions "value of labour," 
"price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the expressions 
"value of cotton," "price of cotton." Moreover, the labourer is 
paid after he has given his labour. In its function of means of pay- 
ment, money realises subsequently the value or price of the arti- 
cle supplied— i.e., in this particular case, the value or price of 
the labour supplied. Finally, the use-value supplied by the labour- 
er to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its func- 
tion, some definite useful labour, the work of tailoring, shoemak- 
ing, spinning, &amp;c. That this same labour is, on the other hand, the 
universal value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by 



1 The Morning Star, a London Free-trade organ,, naif to silliness, 
protested again and again during the American Civil War, with all the moral 
indignation of which man is capable, that the negro in the "Confederate 
States" worked absolutely for nothing. It should have compared the daily 
cost of such a negro with that of the free workman in the East-end of London. 



VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 541 

which it differs from all other commodities, is beyond the cognn 
sance of the ordinary mind. 

Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who re- 
ceives for 12 hours' labour, say the value produced by 6 hours' la- 
bour, say 3s. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour is the means of 
buying the 3s. The value of his labour-power may vary, with the 
value of his usual means of subsistence, from 3 to 4 shillings, or 
from 3 to 2 shillings; or, if the value of his labour-power remains 
constant, its price may, in consequence of changing relations of de- 
mand and supply, rise to 4s. or fall to 2s. He always gives 12 hours 
of labour. Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he 
receives appears to him, therefore, necessarily as a change in the 
value or price of his 12 hours' work. This circumstance misled 
Adam Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant quanti- 
ty, * to the assertion that the value of labour is constant, although 
the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and the same 
working-day, therefore, may represent itself in more or less money 
for the labourer. 

Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. He wishes to 
receive as much labour as possible for as little money as possible. 
Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the differ- 
ence between the price of labour-power and the value which its 
function creates. But, then, he tries to buy all commodities as 
cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple 
cheating, by buying under, and selling over the value. Hence, 
he never comes to see that, if such a thing as the value of labour 
really existed, and he really paid this value, no capital would 
exist, his money would not be turned into capital. 

Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena 
which seem to prove that not value of labour-power is paid, 
but the value of its function, of labour itself. We may reduce these 
phenomena to two great classes: (1.) Change of wages with the 
changing length of the working-day. One might as well conclude 
that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, 
because it costs more to hire a machine for a week than for a day. 
(2.) The individual difference in the wages of different labourers who 
do the same kind of work. We find this individual difference, but 
are not deceived by it, in the system of slavery, where, frankly 
and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is 
sold. Only, in the slave system, the advantage of a labour-power 



1 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation ot the working- 
day when he is referring to piece-wages. 



.542 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

above the average, and the disadvantage of a labour-power below 
the average, affects the slave-owner; in the wage-labour system it 
affects the labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the 
one case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third person. 

For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, "value and 
price of labour," or "wages," as contrasted with the essential relation 
manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour-power, the 
same difference holds that holds in respect to all phenomena and 
their hidden substratum. The former appear directly and spontane- 
ously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discov- 
ered by science. Classical Political Economy nearly touches the 
true relation of things, without, however, consciously formulating 
it. This it cannot so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin. 



543 



CHAPTER XX 
TIME-WAGES 

Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recog* 
nisable in the ordinary economic treatises which, exclusively 
interested in the material side of the question, neglect every dif- 
ference of form. An exposition of all these forms however, belongs 
to the special study of wage-labour, not therefore to this work. 
Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here. 

The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place 
for a definite period of time. The converted form under which 
the daily, weekly, &amp;c, value of labour-power presents itself, is 
hence that of time- wages, therefore day-wages, &amp;c. 

Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th 
chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes of price of la- 
bour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transformation of 
form, into laws of wages. Similarly the distinction between the 
exchange-value of labour-power, and the sum of the necessaries 
of life into which this value is converted, now re-appears as the 
distinction between nominal and real wages. It would be useless to 
repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been 
already worked out in the substantial form. We limit ourselves 
therefore to a few points characteristic of time-wages. 

The sum of money * which the labourer receives for his daily 
or weekly labour, forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of 
his wages estimated in value. But it is clear that according to the 
length of the working-day, that is, according to the amount of 
actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or weekly wage may 
represent very different prices of labour, i.e., very different sums of 



1 The value of money itsell is here always supposed constant. 



544 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

money for the same quantity of labour. * We must, therefore, in 
considering time-wages, again distinguish between the sum total 
of the daily or weekly wages, &amp;c, and the price of labour. How 
then to find this price, i.e., the money-value of a given quantity 
of labour? The average price of labour is found, when the average 
daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number 
of hours in the working-day. If, e.g., the daily value of labour- 
power is 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working-hours, 

and if the working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working-hour is j^ 

shillings =3d. The price of the working-hour thus found serves 
as the unit measure for the price of labour. 

It follows therefore that the daily and weekly wages, &amp;c, 
may remain the same, although the price of labour falls constant- 
ly. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the daily 

3 
value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the working-hour is 3-^ d. 

It falls to 3d. as soon as the working-day rises to 12 hours, to 

2yd. as soon as it rises to 15 hours. Daily or weekly wages remain, 

despite all this, unchanged. On the contrary, the daily or weekly 
wages may rise, although the price of labour remains constant or 
even falls. If, e.g., the working-day is 10 hours, and the daily val- 
ue of labour-power 3 shillings, the price of one working-hour is 

3 
3 -3-d. If the labourer in consequence of increase of trade works 12 

hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage now 
rises to 3 shillings 7-^-d. without any variation in the price of la- 
bour. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive 
amount of labour, its intensive amount increased. 2 The rise of the 
nominal daily or weekly wages may therefore be accompanied by a 
price of labour that remains stationary or falls. The same holds 



1 "The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour." 
(Sir Edward West, "Price of Corn and Wages of Labour." London, 1826, 
p. 67.) West is the author of the anonymous "Essay on the Application of 
Capita] to Land. By a Fellow of the University College of Oxford,** London, 
1815. An epoch-making work in the history of Political Economy. 

2 "The wages of labour depend upon the price of labour and the quan- 
tity of labour performed.... An increase in the wages of labour does not 
necessarily imply an enhancement of the price of labour. From fuller em- 
ployment, and greater exertions, the wages of labour may be considerably 
increased, while the price of labour may continue the same.'* West, 1. c, 
pp. 67, 68, 112 The main question: "How is the price of labour determined?" 
West, however, dismisses with mere banalities. 



TIME-WAGES 545 



as to the income of the labourer's family, as soon as the quantity 
of labour expended by the head of the family is increased by the 
labour of the members of his family. There are, therefore, methods 
of lowering the price of labour independent of the reduction of the 
nominal daily or weekly wages. 1 

As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily, 
weekly labour, &amp;c, the daily or weekly wages depend on the price 
of labour which itself varies either with the value of labour- 
power, or with the difference between its price and its value. Given, 
on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or weekly wages 
depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour. 

The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working- 
hour, is the quotient of the value of a day's labour-power, divided 
by the number of hours of the average working-day. Let the lat- 
ter be 12 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, 
the value of the product of 6 hours of labour. Under these circum- 
stances the price of a working-hour is 3d., the value produced in it 
is 6d. If the labourer is row employed less than 12 hours (or less 
than 6 days in the week), e.g., only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, 
with this price of labour, only 2s. or Is. 6d. a day. 2 As on our 
hypothesis he must work on the average 6 hours daily, in order to 
produce a day's wage corresponding merely to the value of his la- 
bour-power, as according to the same hypothesis he works only 
half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist, it is 



1 This is perceived by the fanatical representative of the industrial 
bourgeoisie of the 18th century, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Com- 
merce" often quoted by us, although he puts the matter in a confused way: 
"It is the quantity of labour and not the price of it (he means by this the 
nominal daily or weekly wages) that is determined by the price of provi- 
sions and other necessaries: reduce the price of necessaries very low, and of 
course you reduce the quantity of labour in proportion. Master-manufac- 
turers know that there are various ways of raising and felling the price of 
labour, besides that of altering its nominal amount." (1. c, pp. 48, 61.) In 
his "Three Lectures on the Rale of Wages," London, 1830, in which N. W. 
Senior uses West's work without mentioning it, he says: "The labourer is 
principally interested in the amount of wages" (p. 15), that is to say the 
labourer is principally interested in what he receives, the nominal sum 
of his wages, not in that which he gives, the amount of labour! 

2 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite 
different from that of a general reduction of the working-day, enforced by 
law. The former has nothing to do with the absolute length of the working-day, 
and may occur just as well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. The normal 
price of labour is in the first case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, 
in the second case on his working 6 hours a day on the average. The result 
is therefore the same if he in the one case is employed only for 7 J / 2 , in the 
other only for 3 hours. 



546 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 
6 hours if he is employed less than 12 hours. In previous chapters 
we saw the destructive consequences of over- work; here we find the 
sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his in- 
sufficient employment. 

If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not 
bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but only to pay wages 
for the hours during which he chooses to employ the labourer, he 
can employ him for a shorter time than that which is originally 
the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or the unit-measure 
of the price of labour. Since this unit is determined by the ratio 

daily value of labour-power .. t , ,, 

„ r , . — -r f = V ft 1 it» oi course, loses all mean- 

Working-day oi a given number ot hours ' 

ing as soon as the working-day ceases to contain a definite number 
of hours. The connexion between the paid and the unpaid labour is 
destroyed. The capitalist can now wring from the labourer a 
certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the 
labour-time necessary for his own subsistence. He can annihilate 
all regularity of employment, and according to his own conve- 
nience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the 
most enormous over-work alternate with relative or absolute 
cessation of work. He can, under the pretence of paying "the nor- 
mal price of labour," abnormally lengthen the working-day with- 
out any corresponding compensation to the labourer. Hence the 
perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed 
in the building trades, against the attempt of the capitalists to 
impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The legal limita- 
tion of the working-day puts an end to such mischief, although 
not, of course, to the diminution of employment caused by the 
competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the labour- 
ers employed, and by crises partial or general. 

With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of 
labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may fall below 
its normal level. This occurs every time that, the price of la- 
bour (reckoned per working-hour) remaining constant, the working- 
day is prolonged beyond its customary length. If in the fractions 

daily value of labour-power ., , . .. 

7-. j - the denominator increases, the numer- 

working-day ' 

ator increases yet more rapidly. The value of labour-power, 
as dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the dura- 
tion of its functioning, and in more rapid proportion than the 
increase of that duration. In many branches of industry where 
time-wage is the general rule without legal limits to the 



TIME-WAGES 547 



working-time, the habit has, therefore, spontaneously grown 
up of regarding the working-day as normal only up to a certain 
point, e.g., up to the expiration of the tenth hour ("normal 
working-day," "the day's work," "the regular hours of work"). 
Beyond this limit the working-time is over-time, and is, taking 
the hour as unit-measure, paid better ("extra pay"), although 
often in a proportion ridiculously small. 1 The normal working- 
day exists here as a fraction of the actual working-day, and the 
latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former. 2 
The increase in the price of labour with the extension of the working- 
day beyond a certain normal limit, takes such a shape in various 
British industries that the low price of labour during the so-called 
normal time compels the labourer to work during the better paid 
over-time, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at all. 3 Legal 
limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities. 4 



1 "The rate of payment for over-time (in lace-making) is so small, from 
y 2 d. and 3 / 4 d. to 2d. per hour, that it stands in painful contrast to the amount 
of injury produced to the health and stamina of the workpeople. . . . The 
small amount thus earned is also often obliged to be spent in extra nourish- 
ment." ("Child. Empl. Com., II. Rep.," p. xvi., n. 117.) 

2 E.g., in paper-staining before the recent introduction into this trade 
of the Factory Act. "We work on with no stoppage for meals, so that the 
day's work of IOV2 hours is finished by 4.30 p. m., and all after that is over- 
time, and we seldom leave off working before 6 p. ra., so that we are really 
working over-time the whole year round." (Mr. Smith's "Evidence in Child. 
Emp. Com., I. Rep.," p. 125.) 

8 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching-works. "In some parts of Scotland this 
trade [before the introduction of the Factory Act in 1862] was carried on by 
a system of over-time, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular hours of work, 
for which a nominal wage of Is. 2d. per day was paid to a man, there being 
every day over-time for three or four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. per hour. 
The effect of this system ... a man could not earn more than 8s. per week 
when working the ordinary hours ... without over-time they could not earn 
a fair day's wages." ("Rept. of Insp. of Factories," April 30th, 1863, p. 10.) 
"The higher wages, for getting adult males to work longer hours, are a temp- 
tation too strong to be resisted." ("Rept. of Insp. of Fact.," April 30th, 
1848, p. 5.) The book-binding trade in the city of London employs very many 
young girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which pre- 
scribe certain definite hours of labour. Nevertheless, they work in the last 
week of each month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with the 
older labourers, in a very mixed company. "The masters tempt them by extra 
pay and supper," which they eat in neighbouring public houses. The great 
debauchery thus produced among these "young immortals" ("Children's 
Employment Comm., V. Rept.," p. 44, n. 191) is compensated by the fact 
that among the rest many Bibles and religious books are bound by them. 

4 See "Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, 1. c. With very ac- 
curate appreciation of the state of things, the London labourers employed in 
the building trades declared, during the great strike and lock-out of 1860, 



548 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working- 
days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the wages. 1 A. Red- 
grave, factory inspector, illustrates this by a comparative review 
of the 20 years from 1839-1859, according to which wages rose in 
the factories under the 10 hours' law, whilst they fell in the facto- 
ries in which the work lasted 14 to 15 hours daily. 2 

From the law: "the price of labour being given, the daily or 
weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended," it 
follows, first of all, that, the lower the price of labour, the greater 
must be the quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working- 
day for the labourer to secure even a miserable average wage. 
The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the 
extension of the labour-time. 3 

On the other hand, the extension of the working-time pro- 
duces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour, and with this a fall 
in the day's or week's wages. 

The determination of the price of labour by: 

daily value of labour-pow er 

working-day of a given number of hours ' 

shows that a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the 
price of labour, if no compensation steps in. But the same circum- 
stances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the 
working-day, also allow him first, and compel him finally, to nomi- 
nally lower the price of labour, until the total price of the increased 
number of hours is lowered, and, therefore, the daily or week- 
ly wage. Reference to two circumstances is sufficient here. If one 



that Wiey would only accept wages by the hour under two conditions (l)i 
that, with the price of the working-hour, a normal working-day of 9 and 
10 hours respectively should be fixed, and that the price of the hour for the 
10 hoursj working-day should be higher than that for the hour of the 9 hours' 
working-day; (2), that every hour beyond the normal working-day should 
be reckoned as over-time and proportionally more highly paid. 

1 "It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, 
small wages are also so." ("Report of Insp. of Fact.," 31st. Oct., 1863, p. 9.) 
"The work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the most part, 
excessively prolonged." ("Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 15.) 

2 "Reports of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. 31, 32. 

3 The hand nail-makers in England, e.g., have, on account of the 
low price of labour, to work 15 hours a day in order to hammer out their mis- 
erable weekly wage. "It's a great many hours in a day (6 a. m. to 8 p. m.), 
and he has to work hard all the time to get lid. or Is., and there is the wear 
of the tools, the cosl. of firing, and something for waste iron to go out of 
this, which takes off altogether 2%d. or 3d." ("Children's Employment Com., 
III. Report.," p. 136, n. 671.) The women earn by the same working-time a 
week's wage of only 5 shillings. (1. c, p. 137, n. 674.) 



TIME-WAGES 549 



man does the work of 1% or 2 men, the supply of labour increases, 
although the supply of labour-power on the market remains 
constant. The competition thus created between the labourers 
allows the capitalist to beat down the price of labour, whilst the 
falling price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to screw up 
still further the working-time. 1 Soon, however, this command 
over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e., quantities in ex- 
cess of the average social amount, becomes a source of competition 
amongst the capitalists themselves. A part of the price of the com- 
modity consists of the price of labour. The unpaid part of the la- 
bour-price need not be reckoned in the price of the commodity. It 
may be presented to the buyer. This is the first step to which com- 
petition leads. The second step to which it drives, is to exclude 
also from the selling price of the commodity, at least a part of the 
abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working- 
day. In this way an abnormally low selling price of the commodity 
arises, at first sporadically, and becomes fixed by degrees; a lower 
selling price which henceforward becomes the constant basis 
of a miserable wage for an excessive working-time, as originally 
it was the product of these very circumstances. This movement is 
simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not be- 
long to this part of our subject. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, 
for a moment, speak for himself. "In Birmingham there is so much 
competition of masters one against another, that many are ob- 
liged to do things as employers that they would otherwise be 
ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public 
gets the benefit." 2 The reader will remember the two sorts of Lon- 
don bakers, of whom one sold the bread at its full price (the "full- 
priced" bakers), the other below its normal price ("the underpriced," 
"the undersellers"). The "full-priced" denounced their rivals before 
the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry: "They only exist now by 
first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of 
their men for 12 hours' wages.... The unpaid labour of the men was 
made ... the source whereby the competition was carried on, and 
continues so to this day.... The competition among the master- 



1 It a factory hand, e.g., refused to work the customary long hours, 
"he would very shortly be replaced by somebody who would work any length 
of time, and thus be thrown out of employment." ("Reports of inspectors of 
Fact.," 30th April, 1848, Evidence, p. 39, n 58.) "If one man performs the 
work of two. . the rate of profits will generally be raised ... in consequence 
of the additional supply of labour having diminished its price." (Senior, 
I. c, p. 15.) 

2 "Children's Employment Com., III. Rep.," Evidence, p. 66, n. 22. 



550 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of night-work. An 
underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according to 
the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the la- 
bour of the men.... If I got only 12 hours' work out of my men, and 
my neighbour got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. If 
the men could insist on payment for over-work, this would be set 
right.... A large number of those employed by the undersellers 
are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any 
wages they can obtain." 1 

This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows, how the 
appearance only of the relations of production mirrors itself in the 
brain of the capitalist. The capitalist does not know that the 
normal price of labour also includes a definite quantity of unpaid 
labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of 
his gain. The category, surplus labour-time, does not exist at all 
for him, since it is included in the normal working-day, which he 
thinks he has paid for in the day's wages. But over-time does exist 
for him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits 
corresponding with the usual price of labour. Face to face with 
his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for 
this over-time. He again does not know that this extra pay in- 
cludes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the custom- 
ary hour of labour. For example, the price of one hour of the 12 
hours' working-day is 3d., say the value-product of half a work- 
ing-hour, whilst the price of the over-time working-hour is 4d., 

or the value-product of -^ of a working-hour. In the first case the 

capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in the second, one- 
third of the working-hour without paying for it. 



1 "Report, &amp;c, Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Jour- 
neymen Bakers." Lond. 1862, p. lii, and ib. Evidence, notes 479, 359, 27. 
Anyhow the full-priced also, as was mentioned above, and as their spokes- 
man, Bennett, himself admits, make their men "generally begin work at 
11 p. m. ... up to 8 o'clock the next morning ... they are then engaged all 
day long ... as late as 7 o'clock in the evening." (1. c, p. 22.) 



551 



CHAPTER XXI 
PIECE-WAGES 

Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of 
wages by time, just as wages by time are a converted form of the 
value or price of labour-power. 

In piece-wages it seems at first sight as if the use-value bought 

from the labourer was, not the function of his labour-power, living 

labour, but labour already realised in the product, and as if the 

price of this labour was determined, not as with time-wages, by 

,, f ,. daily value of labour-power , , , , , 

the traction: tt^t-. ^ : . : r ft but by the ca- 

working-day ot a given number or hours J 

pacity for work of the producer. 1 

The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive 
a first severe shock from the fact that both forms of wages exist 
side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; 
e.g., "the compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the 
piece, time-work being the exception, while those in the country 
work by the day, the exception being work by the piece. The ship- 
wrights of the port of London work by the job or piece, while those 
of all other parts work by the day." 2 

In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same 
work, piece-wages are paid to the French, time-wages to the Eng- 
lish. In the regular factories in which throughout piece-wages 
predominate, particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form 



1 "The system ot piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the 
working-man; it is halfway between the position of the mere day-labourer 
depending upon the will of the capitalist and the co-operative artisan, who 
in the not distant future promises to combine the artisan and the capitalist 
in his own person. Piece-workers are in fact their own masters, even whilst 
working upon the capital of the employer." (John Watts: "Trade Societies 
and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies." Manchester, 1865, 
pp. 52, 53.) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all long-ago- 
rotten, apologetic commonplaces. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in 
Owenism and published in 1842 another pamphlet: "Facts and Fictions of 
Political Economists," in which among other things he declares that "prop- 
erty is robbery." That is long ago. 

2 T. J. Dunning: "Trades' Unions and Strikes," Lond. 1860, p. 22. 



552 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of wage, and are therefore paid by time. 1 But it is moreover self-evi- 
dent that the difference of form in the payment of wages alters in no 
way their essential nature, although the one form may be more fa- 
vourable to the development of capitalist production than the other. 
Let the ordinary working-day contain 12 hours of which 6 
are paid, 6 unpaid. Let its value-product be 6 shillings, that of 
one hour's labour therefore 6d. Let us suppose that, as the result 
of experience, a labourer who works with the average amount of 
intensity and skill, who, therefore, gives in fact only the time so- 
cially necessary to the production of an article, supplies in 12 hours 
24 pieces, either distinct products or measurable parts of a contin- 
uous whole. Then the value of these 24 pieces, after subtraction of 
the portion of constant capital contained in them, is 6 shillings, 

and the value of a single piece 3d. The labourer receives l-^d. 

per piece, and thus earns in 12 hours 3 shillings. Just as, with time- 
wages, it does not matter whether we assume that the labourer 
works 6 hours for himself and 6 hours for the capitalist, or half 
of every hour for himself, and the other half for the capitalist, so 
here it does not matter whether we say that each individual piece 
is half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of 12 pieces is 
the equivalent only of the value of the labour-power, whilst in the 
other 12 pieces surplus-value is incorporated. 

The form of piece-wages is just as irrational as that of time- 
wages. Whilst in our example two pieces of a commodity, after 
subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in 
them, are worth 6d. as being the product of one hour, the labourer 
receives for them a price of 3d. Piece-wages do not, in fact dis- 
tinctly express any relation of value. It is not, therefore, a ques- 
tion of measuring the value of the piece by the working-time incor- 
porated in it, but on the contrary of measuring the working-time 
the labourer has expended, by the number of pieces he has pro- 



1 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two 
forms of wage favours the masters' cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, 
the half of which work by the piece, and have a direct interest in working 
longer hours. The other 200 are paid by the day, work equally long with 
the others, and get no more money for their over-time.... The work of these 
200 people for half an hour a day is equal to one person's work for 50 hours, 
or 5 / 6 of one person's labour in a week, and is a positive gain to the employ- 
er." ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1860," p. 9.) "Over-working to 
a very considerable extent still prevails; and, in most instances, with that 
security against detection and punishment which the law itself affords. I 
have in many former reports shown ... the injury to workpeople who are not 
employed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." (Leonard Horner in 
"Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1859, pp. 8, 9.) 



PIECE-WAGES 553 



duced. In time-wages the labour is measured by its immediate 
duration, in piece-wages by the quantity of products in which 
the labour has embodied itself during a given time. 1 The price of 
labour-time itself is finally determined by the equation; value of a 
day's labour= daily value of labour-power. Piece-wage is, there- 
fore, only a modified form of time-wage. 

Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic 
peculiarities of piece-wages. 

The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work it- 
self, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be 
paid in full. Piece-wages become, from this point of view, the most 
fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating. 

They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the in- 
tensity of labour. Only the working-time which is embodied in a 
quantum of commodities determined beforehand and experimental- 
ly fixed, counts as socially necessary working-time, and is paid as 
such. In the larger workshops of the London tailors, therefore, a 
certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.g., is called an hour, or half 
an hour, the hour at 6d. By practice it is known how much is the 
average product of one hour. With new fashions, repairs, etc., a con- 
test arises between master and labourer, whether a particular piece 
of work is one hour, and so on, until here also experience decides. 
Similarly in the London furniture workshops, etc. If the labourer 
does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence 
supply a certain minimum of work per day, he is dismissed. 2 

Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled 
by the form of wage itself, superintendence of labour becomes 
in great part superfluous. Piece-wages therefore lay the foundation 
of the modern "domestic labour," described above, as well as of a 
hierarchically organised system of exploitation and oppression. 
The latter has two fundamental forms. On the one hand piece- 
wages facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist 
and the wage-labourer, the "sub-letting of labour." The gain of 
these middlemen comes entirely from the difference between the 
labour-price which the capitalist pays, and the part of that price 



1 "Le salaire peut se mesurer de deux manieres: ou sur la duree du tra- 
vail, ou sur son produit." ("Abrege elementaire des principes de l'Economie 
Politique." Paris 1796, p. 32.) The author of this anonymous work: G. Gamier. 

2 "So much weight of cotton is delivered to him [the spinner], and 
he has to return by a certain time, in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or 
yarn, of a certain degree of fineness, and he is paid so much per pound for 
all that he so returns. If his work is defective in quality, the penalty falls 
on him, if less in quantity than the minimum fixed for a given time, he is 
dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure, I. c, p. 317.) 



554 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

which they actually allow to reach the labourer. * In England this 
system is characteristically called the "Sweating system." On the 
other hand piece-wage allows the capitalist to make a contract for so 
much per piece with the head labourer — in manufactures with the 
chief of some group, in mines with the extractor of the coal, in the fac- 
tory with the actual machine-worker — at a price for which the head 
labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and payment of his assist- 
ant workpeople. The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here 
effected through the exploitation of the labourer by the labourer. 2 

Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the 
labourer to strain his labour-power as intensely as possible; this 
enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of 
intensity of labour. 3 It is moreover now the personal interest of the 
labourer to lengthen the working-day, since with it his daily or 
weekly wages rise. 4 This gradually brings on a reaction like that 
already described in time-wages, without reckoning that the pro- 
longation of the working-day, even if the piece-wage remains con- 
stant, includes of necessity a fall in the price of the labour. 

In time-wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for 
the same kind of work, whilst in piece-wages, though the price 
of the working-time is measured by a certain quantity of product, 

1 "It is when work passes through several hands, each of which is to 
take its share of profits, while only the last does the work, that the pay 
which reaches the workwoman is miserably disproportioned." ("Child. Emp. 
Com. II. Report," p. lxx., n. 424.) 

2 Even Watts, the apologetic, remarks: "It would be a great improve- 
ment to the system of piece-work, if all the men employed on a job were 
partners in the contract, each according to his abilities, instead of one man 
being interested in over-working his fellows for his own benefit." (1. c, p. 53.) 
On the vileness of this system, cf. "Child. Emp. Com. Rep. III.," p. 66, n. 22, 
p. 11, n. 124, p. xi, n. 13, 53, 59, etc. 

3 This spontaneous result is often artificially helped along, e.g., in 
the Engineering Trade of London, a customary trick is "the selecting of a 
man who possesses superior physical strength and quickness, as the princi- 
pal of several workmen, and paying him an additional rate, by the quarter 
or otherwise, with the understanding that he is to exert himself to the ut- 
most to induce the others, who are only paid the ordinary wages, to keep 
up to him ... without any comment this will go far to explain many of the 
complaints of stinting the action, superior skill, and working-power, made 
by the employers against the men" (in Trades-Unions. Dunning, 1. c, pp. 
22, 23). As the author is himself a labourer and secretary of a Trades' Union, 
this might be taken for exaggeration. But the reader may compare the 
"highly respectable" Cyclopaedia of Agriculture of J. Ch. Morton, Art., "La- 
bourer," where this method is recommended to the farmers as an approved one. 

4 "All those who are paid by piece-work... profit v by the transgression 
of the legal limits of work. This observation as to the willingness to work 
over-time is especially applicable to the women employed as weavers and 
reelers." ("Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 30th April, 1858," p. 9.) "This system 



PIECE-WAGES 555 



the day's or week's wage will vary with the individual differences 
of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a given time the mini- 
mum of product only, another the average, a third more than the 
average. With regard to actual receipts there is, therefore, great 
variety according to the different skill, strength, energy, staying- 
power, etc., of the individual labourers. * Of course this does not 
alter the general relations between capital and wage-labour. First, 
the individual differences balance one another in the workshop 
as a whole, which thus supplies in a given working-time the aver- 
age product, and the total wages paid will be the average wages of 
that particular branch of industry. Second, the proportion between 
wages and surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of 
surplus-labour supplied by each particular labourer corresponds 
with the wage received by him. But the wider scope that piece- 
wage gives to individuality, tends to develop on the one hand that 
individuality, and with it the sense of liberty, independence, and 
self-control of the labourers, on the other, their competition one 
with another. Piece-work has, therefore, a tendency, while raising 
individual wages above the average, to lowei this average itself. 
But where a particular rate of piece-wage has for a long time been 
fixed by tradition, and its lowering, therefore, presented especial 
difficulties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had 
recourse to its compulsory transformation into time-wages. Hence, 
e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the ribbon-weavers of Coventry. 2 

(piece-work), so advantageous to the employer ... tends directly to encourage 
the young potter greatly to over-work himself during the four or five years 
during which he is employed in the piece-work system, but al low wages ... 
This is ... another great cause to which the bad constitutions of the potters 
are to he attributed." ("Child Empl. Com. 1. Rept," p. xiii.) 

1 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much 
per job ... wages may very materially differ in amount... But in work by the 
day there is generally an uniform rate ... recognised by both employer and 
employed as the standard of w 7 ages for the general run of workmen in the 
trade." (Dunning, 1. c, p. 17.) 

2 "Le travail des Compagnons-artisans sera regie a la journge ou a 
la piece... Ces maitres-artisans savent a peu pres combien d'ouvrage un com- 
pagnon-artisan peut faire par jour dans chaque metier, et les payent souvent 
a proportion de l'ouvrage qu'ils font; ainsi ces compagnons travaillent autant 
qu'ils peuvent, pour leur propre interet, sans autre inspection" (Cantillon, 
"Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en general," Amst. Ed.. 1756, pp 185 and 
202. The first edition appeared in 1755.) Cantillon, from whom Quesnay, 
Sir James Steuart &amp; A Smith have largely drawn, already here represents 
piece-wage as simply a modified form of time-wage. The French edition of 
Cantillon professes in its title to be a translation from the English, but the 
English edition: "The Analysis of Trade, Commerce, etc., by Philip Cantil- 
lon, late of the city of London, Merchant," is not only of later date (1759), 
but proves by its contents that it is a later and revised edition: e.g., in the 



556 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system 
described in the preceding chapter. 1 

From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage 
is the form of wages most in harmony with the capitalist mode of 
production. Although by no means new — it figures side by side 
with time-wages officially in the French and English labour stat- 
utes of the 14th century — it only conquers a larger field for action 
during the period of Manufacture, properly so-called. In the stormy 
youth of Modern Industry, especially from 1797 to 1815, it served 
as a lever for the lengthening of the working-day, and the lowering 
of wages. Very important materials for the fluctuation of wages 
during that period are to be found in the Blue books: "Report and 
Evidence from the Select Committee on Petitions respecting the 
Corn Laws" (Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and "Report 
from the Lords' Committee, on the state of the Growth, Commerce, 
and Consumption of Grain, and all Laws relating thereto" (Session 
of 1814-15). Here we find documentary evidence of the con- 
stant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of the Anti- 
Jacobin War. In the weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fall- 
en so low that in spite of the very great lengthening of the working- 
day, the daily wages were then lower than before. "The real earnings 
of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority 
over the common labourer, which at first was very great, has now 
almost entirely ceased. Indeed ... the difference in the wages of 
skilful and common labour is far less now than at any former pe- 
riod." 2 How little the increased intensity and extension of labour 
through piece-wages benefited the agricultural proletariat, the fol- 
lowing passage borrowed from a work on the side of the landlords 
and farmers shows: "By far the greater part of agricultural opera- 



French edition, Hume is not yet mentioned, whilst in the English, on the 
other hand, Petty hardly figures any longer. The English edition is theoret- 
ically less important, but it contains numerous details referring specifi- 
cally to English commerce, bullion trade, etc., that are wanting in the French 
text. The words on the title-page of the English edition, according to which 
the work is "Taken chiefly from the manuscript of a very ingenious gen- 
tleman, deceased, and adapted, etc.," seem, therefore, a pure fiction, very cus- 
tomary at that time. 

1 "Combien de fois n'avons-nous pas vu, dans certains ateliers, embau- 
cher beaucoup plus d'ouvriers que ne le demandait le travail a mettre en 
main? Souvent, dans la prevision d'un travail aleatoire, quelquefois meme 
imaginaire, on admet des ouvriers: comme on les paie aux pieces, on se dit 
qu'on ne court aucun risque, parce que toutes les partes de temps seront a 
la charge des inoccupes." (H. Gregoir: "Les Typographes devant le Tribunal 
correctionnel de Bruxelles," Bruxelles, 1865, p. 9.) 

8 "Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain," London, 1815. 



PIECE-WAGES 557 



tions is done by people, who are hired for the day or on piece-work. 
Their weekly wages are about 12s., and although it may be as- 
sumed that a man earns on piece-work under the greater stimulus to 
labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. more than on weekly wages, yet it is 
found, on calculating his total income, that his loss of employ- 
ment, during the year, outweighs this gain... Further, it will 
generally be found that the wages of these men bear a certain pro- 
portion to the price of the necessary means of subsistence, so that 
a man with two children is able to bring up his family without re- 
course to parish relief." 1 Malthus at that time remarked with 
reference to the facts published by Parliament: "I confess that I 
see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece- 
wage. Really hard work during 12 or 14 hours of the day, or for 
any longer time, is too much for any human being." 2 

In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wage be- 
comes the general rule, because capital can there only increase 
the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour. 3 

With the changing productiveness of labour the same quan- 
tum of product represents a varying working-time. Therefore, piece- 
wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined 
working-time. In our example above, 24 pieces were produced in 
12 hours, whilst the value of the product of the 12 hours was 6s., 
the daily value of the labour-power 3s , the price of the labour- 

hour 3d., and the wage for one piece 1-^-d. In one piece half an 

hour's labour was absorbed. If the same working-day now supplies, 

in consequence of the doubled productiveness of labour, 48 pieces 

instead of 24, and all other circumstances remain unchanged, 

1 3 

then the piece-wage falls from 1^-d. to-rd., as every piece now 

1 1 1 

only represents-^- instead of — of a working-hour. 24 by 1yd. =3s., 

and in like manner 48 by -j-d. =3s. In other words, piece-wage is 

lowered in the same proportion as the number of the pieces pro- 
duced in the same time rises, 4 and therefore as the working-time 
spent on the same piece falls. This change in piece-wage, so far 



1 "A Defence of the Landowners and Farmers of Great Britain," 1814, 
PP 4, 5. 

2 Malthus, "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815. 

3 "Those who are paid by piece-work ... constitute probably four-fifths 
of the workers in the factories." "Report of Insp of Fact., 30th April, 1858." 

4 "The productive power of his spinning-machine is accurately meas- 
ured, and the rate of pay for work done with it decreases with, though not 



558 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist and 
labour. Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actu- 
ally lowering the price of labour, or because increased productive 
power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the 
same. Or because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of 
piece-wages, viz., that his product is paid for, and not his labour- 
power, and therefore revolts against a lowering of wages, unaccom- 
panied by a lowering in the selling price of the commodity. "The 
operatives. . . carefully watch the price of the raw material and the 
price of manufactured goods, and are thus enabled to form an accu- 
rate estimate of their master's profits." 1 

The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions 
as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour. 2 He cries out against 
this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and 
declares roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern 
the labourer at all. 3 



as, the increase of its productive power." (Ure, 1. c, p. 317.) This last 
apologetic phrase Ure himself again cancels. The lengthening of the mule 
causes some increase of labour, he admits. The labour does therefore not di- 
minish in the same ratio as its productivity increases. Further: "By this in- 
crease the productive power of the machine will be augmented one-fifth. 
When this event happens the spinner will not be paid at the same rate for 
work done as he was before, but as that rate will not be diminished in the 
ratio of one-fifth, the improvement will augment his money earnings for any 
given number of hours' work," but "the foregoing statement requires a cer- 
tain modification.... The spinner has to pay something additional for juve- 
nile aid out of his additional sixpence, accompanied by displacing a portion 
of adults" (1. c, p. 321), which has in no way a tendency to raise wages. 

1 H. Fawcett: "The Economic Position of the British Labourer." Cam- 
bridge and London, 1865, p. 178. 

2 In the London Standard of October 26, 1861, there is a report of pro- 
ceedings of the firm of John Bright &amp; Co., before the Rochdale magistrates 
"to prosecute for intimidation the agents of the Carpet Weavers Trades' 
Union. Bright's partners had introduced new machinery which would turn 
out 240 yards of carpet in the time and with the labour (!) previously required 
to produce 160 yards. The workmen had no claim whatever to share in 
the profits made by the investment of their employer's capital in mechani- 
cal improvements. Accordingly, Messrs. Bright proposed to lower the rate of 
pay from l%d. per yard to Id., leaving the earnings of the men exactly the 
same as before for the same labour. But there was a nominal reduction, 
of which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning beforehand." 

3 "Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavour to 
share in the benefits of improved machinery. (Quelle hprreur!) ... the de- 
manding higher wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other words 
the endeavour to establish a duty on mechanical improvements." ("On 
Combination of Trades," new ed., London, 1834, p. 42.) 



559 



CHAPTER XXII 
NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 

In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combi- 
nations which may bring about a change in magnitude of the value 
of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either abso- 
lutely or relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus-value; whilst on 
the other hand, the quantum of the means of subsistence in which 
the price of labour is realised might again undergo fluctuations in- 
dependent of, or different from, the changes of this price. 1 As has 
been already said, the simple translation of the value, or respec- 
tively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages 
transforms all these laws into laws of the fluctuations of wages. 
That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single 
country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in differ- 
ent countries as contemporaneous difference of national wages. In 
the comparison of the wages in different nations, we must therefore 
take into account all the factors that determine changes in the 
amount of the value of labour-power; the price and the extent of the 
prime necessaries of life as naturally and historically developed, 
the cost of training the labourers, the part played by the labour of 
women and children, the productiveness of labour, its extensive 
and intensive magnitude. Even the most superficial comparison 
requires the reduction first of the average day-wage for the same 
trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day. After this 
reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must 
again be translated into piece-wage, as the latter only can be a 
measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour. 

In every country there is a certain average intensity of la- 
bour, below which the labour for the production of a commodity 
requires more than the socially necessary time, and therefore does 



1 "It is not accurate to say that wages" (he deals here with their money 
expression) "are increased, because they purchase more of a cheaper article." 
(David Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth," &amp;c, 1814, Vol. 
I, p. 417, Note.) 



560 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



not reckon as labour of normal quality. Only a degree of intensity 
above the national average affects, in a given country, the measure 
of value by the mere duration of the working-time. This is not the 
case on the universal market, whose integral parts are the indi- 
vidual countries. The average intensity of labour changes from 
country to country; here it is greater, there less. These national 
averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the average unit of 
universal labour. The more intense national labour, therefore, 
as compared with the less intense, produces in the same time more 
value, which expresses itself in more money. 

But the law of value in its international application is yet 
more modified by this, that on the world-market the more produc- 
tive national labour reckons also as the more intense, so long as the 
more productive nation is not compelled by competition to lower 
the selling price of its commodities to the level of their value. 

In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a coun- 
try, in the same proportion do the national intensity and productivi- 
ty of labour there rise above the international level. 1 The different 
quantities of commodities of the same kind, produced in differ- 
ent countries in the same working-time, have, therefore, unequal 
international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.e., 
in sums of money varying according to international values. The 
relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with 
more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation 
with less developed. It follows, then, that the nominal wages, the 
equivalent of labour-power expressed in money, will also be 
higher in the first nation than in the second; which does not at all 
prove that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for the means 
of subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer. 

But even apart from these relative differences of the value of 
money in different countries, it will be found, frequently, that the 
daily or weekly, &amp;c, wage in the first nation is higher than in the 
second, whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the price of labour 
as compared both with surplus-value and with the value of the 
product, stands higher in the second than in the first. 2 



1 We shall inquire, in another place, what circumstances in relation 
to productivity may modify this law for individual branches of industry. 

2 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith: "It 
deserves, likewise, to be remarked, that although the apparent price of la- 
bour is usually lower in poor countries, where the produce of the soil, and 
grain in general, is cheap; yet it is in fact for the most part really higher 
than in other countries For it is not the wages that is given to the labourer 
per day that constitutes the real price of labour, although it is its apparent 
price. The real price is that which a certain quantity of work performed actu- 



NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 561 

J. W. Go well, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, 
after careful investigation of the spinning trade, came to the con- 
clusion that, "in England wages are virtually lower to the capi- 
talist, though higher to the operative than on the Continent of 
Europe." (Ure, p. 314.) The English Factory Inspector, Alexander 
Redgrave, in his Report of Oct. 31st, 1866, proves by comparative 
statistics with Continental states, that in spite of lower wages 
and much longer working-time, Continental labour is, in propor- 
tion to the product, dearer than English. An English manager of 
a cotton factory in Oldenburg, declares that the working-time there 
lasted from 5.30 a. m. to 8 p. m., Saturdays included, and that the 
workpeople there, when under English overlookers, did not supply 
during this time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours, 
but under German overlookers much less. Wages are much lower 
than in England, in many cases 50%, but the number of hands 
in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain depart- 
ments in the proportion of 5 : 3— Mr. Redgrave gives very full de- 
tails as to the Russian cotton factories. The data were given him 
by an English manager until recently employed there. On l^his Rus- 
sian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old horrors of the early 
days of English factories are in full swing. The managers are, of 
course, English, as the native Russian capitalist is of no use in 
factory business. Despite all over-work, continued day and night, 
despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, 
Russian manufacture manages to vegetate only by prohibition of 
foreign competition. I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of 
Mr. Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per factory and 
per spinner in the different countries of Europe. He, himself, re- 
marks that he had collected these figures a few years ago, and that 
since that time the size of the factories and the number of spin- 
dles per labourer in England has increased. He supposes, however, 
an approximately equal progress in the Continental countries 
mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value 
for purposes of comparison. 



ally costs the employer; and considered in this light, labour is in almost 
all cases cheaper in rich countries than in those that are poorer, although 
the price of grain, and other provisions, is usuaHy much lower in the last 
than in the first... Labour estimated by the day, is much lower in Scotland 
than in England... Labour by the piece is generally cheaper in England." 
(James Anderson, "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National 
Industry, &amp;c, Edin. 1777, pp. 350, 351.) On the contrary, lowness of wages 
produces, in its turn, dearness of labour. "Labour being dearer in Ireland 
than it is in England ... because the wages are so much lower." (N. 2074 in 
"Royal Commission on Railways, Minutes," 1867.) 



562 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



AVERAGE NUMBER OF SPINDLES PER FACTORY. 

England, average of spindles per factory 12,600 

France, " " " " " 1,500 

Prussia, " " " " " 1,500 

Belgium, " " " " " 4,000 

Saxony, " " " " " 4,500 

Austria, * " " 7,000 

Switzerland," " " " " 8,000 



AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED TO SPINDLES. 

France, one person to 14 spindles 



28 
37 
46 
49 
50 
50 
55 

Smaller States of Germany, 55 

Great Britain, " " 74 



Russia, 

Prussia, 

Bavaria, 

Austria, 

Belgium. 

Saxony, 

Switzerland, 



"This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, "is yet more unfa- 
vourable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so large a number 
of factories in which weaving by power is carried on in conjunction 
with spinning [whilst in the table the weavers are not deducted] , 
and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning factories; if it were 
possible to compare like with like, strictly, I could find many cot- 
ton spinning factories in my district in which mules containing 
2,200 spindles are minded by one man (the "minder") and two as- 
sistants only, turning off daily 220 lbs. of yarn, measuring 400 
miles in length." (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866, pp. 
31-37, passim.) 

It is well known that in Eastern Europe as well as in Asia, 
English companies have undertaken the construction of railways, 
and have, in making them, employed side by side with the native 
labourers, a certain number of English working-men. Compelled 
by practical necessity, they thus have had to take into account the 
national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought 
them no loss. Their experience shows that even if the height of 
wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of labour, 
the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction. 



NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 563 

In an "Essay on the Rate of Wages," l one of his first economic 
writings, H. Carey tries to prove that the wages of the different 
nations are directly proportional to the degree of productiveness of 
the national working-days, in order to draw from this international 
relation, the conclusion that wages everywhere rise and fall in pro- 
portion to the productiveness of labour. The whole of our analysis 
of the production of surplus-value shows the absurdity of this con- 
clusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises, instead of, 
after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to and 
fro a confused mass of statistical materials. The best of it is that 
he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be accord- 
ing to his theory. For State intervention has falsified the natural 
economic relations. The different national wages must be reckoned, 
therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form 
of taxes, came to the labourer himself. Ought not Mr. Carey to con- 
sider further whether those "State expenses" are not the "natural" 
fruits of capitalistic development? The reasoning is quite worthy 
of the man who first declared the relations of capitalist production 
to be eternal laws of Nature and reason, whose free, harmonious 
working is only disturbed by the intervention of the State, in or- 
der afterwards to discover that the diabolical influence of England 
on the world-market (an influence, which, it appears, does not 
spring from the natural laws of capitalist production) necessitates 
State intervention, i.e., the protection of those laws of Nature and 
reason by the State, alias the System of Protection. He discovered 
further, that the theorems of Ricardo and others, in which existing 
social antagonisms and contradictions are formulated, are not the 
ideal product of the real economic movement, but on the contra- 
ry, that the real antagonisms of capitalist production in England 
and elsewhere are the result of the theories of Ricardo and others! 
Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that 
destroys the inborn beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode 
of production. A step further, and he will, perhaps, discover that 
the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself. Only a man 
with such atrocious want of the critical faculty and such spurious 
erudition deserved, in spite of his Protectionist heresy, to become 
the secret source of the harmonious wisdom of a Bastiat, and of 
all the other Free-trade optimists of to-day. 



1 "Essay on the Rate of Wages: with an Examination of the Causes 
of the Differences in the Condition of the Labouring Population throughout 
the World," Philadelphia, 1835. 



564 



PART VII 

THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 



The conversion of a sum of money into means of production 
and labour-power, is the first step taken by the quantum of value 
that is going to function as capital. This conversion takes place in 
the market, within the sphere of circulation. The second step, the 
process of production, is complete so soon as the means of produc- 
tion have been converted into commodities whose value exceeds 
that of their component parts, and, therefore, contains the capital 
originally advanced, plus a surplus-value. These commodities 
must then be thrown into circulation. They must be sold, their 
value realised in money, this money afresh converted into capital, 
and so over and over again. This circular movement, in which the 
same phases are continually gone through in succession, forms the 
circulation of capital. 

The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must 
have contrived to sell his commodities, and to reconvert into cap- 
ital the greater part of the money so received. In the following 
pages we shall assume that capital circulates in its normal way. 
The detailed analysis of the process will be found in Book II. 

The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who ex- 
tracts unpaid labour directly from the labourers, and fixes it in com- 
modities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the 
ultimate owner, of this surplus-value. He has to share it with cap- 
italists, with landowners, &amp;c, who fulfil other functions in the 
complex of social production. Surplus-value, therefore, splits up 
into various parts. Its fragments fall to various categories of 
persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, 
such as profit, interest, merchants' profit, rent, &amp;c. It is only in 
Book III. that we can take in hand these modified forms of surplus- 
value. 

On the one hand, then, we assume that the capitalist sells at 
their value the commodities he has produced, without concerning 1. 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 565 

ourselves either about the new forms that capital assumes while in 
the sphere of circulation, or about the concrete conditions of re- 
production hidden under these forms. On the other hand, we treat 
the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, 
better perhaps, as the representative of all the sharers with him in 
the booty. We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation from an 
abstract point of view— i.e., as a mere phase in the actual proc- 
ess of production. 

So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have 
succeeded in selling his commodities, and in reconverting the sale- 
money into capital. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value 
into fragments neither alters its nature nor the conditions under 
which it becomes an element of accumulation. Whatever be the 
proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains 
for himself, or yields up to others, he is the one who, in the first 
instance, appropriates it. We, therefore, assume no more than 
what actually takes place. On the other hand, the simple funda- 
mental form of the process of accumulation is obscured by the in- 
cident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the split- 
ting up of surplus-value. An exact analysis of the process, there- 
fore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena 
that hide the play of its inner mechanism. 



566 



CHAPTER XXIII 
SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 

Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, 
it must be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically 
through the same phases. A society can no more cease to produce 
than it can cease to consume. When viewed, therefore, as a con- 
nected whole, and as flowing on with incessant renewal, every 
social process of production is, at the same time, a process of re- 
production. 

The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. 
No society can go on producing, in other words, no society can re- 
produce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into 
means of production, or elements of fresh products. All other cir- 
cumstances remaining the same, the only mode by which it can 
reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing 
the means of production — i.e., the instruments of labour, the raw 
material, and the auxiliary substances consumed in the course of 
the year— by an equal quantity of the same kind of articles; 
these must be separated from the mass of the yearly products, and 
thrown afresh into the process of production. Hence, a definite por- 
tion of each year's product belongs to the domain of production. 
Destined for productive consumption from the very first, this por- 
tion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally un- 
fitted for individual consumption. 

If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduc- 
tion. Just as in the former the labour-process figures but as a means 
towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but 
as a means of reproducing as capital— i.e., as self-expanding val- 
ue,— the value advanced. It is only because his»moncy constant- 
ly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist at- 
taches to a man. If, for instance, a sum of £100 has this year been 
converted into capital, and produced a surplus-value of £20, it 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 567 



must continue during next year, and subsequent years, to repeat 
the same operation. As a periodic increment of the capital ad- 
vanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value 
acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital. 1 

If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide 
for his consumption, and be spent as periodically as it is gained, 
then, cseteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place. And 
although this reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of 
production on the old scale, yet this mere repetition, or continuity, 
gives a new character to the process, or, rather, causes the disap- 
pearance of some apparent characteristics which it possessed as an 
isolated discontinuous process. 

The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the prelude 
to the process of production; and this prelude is constantly repeat- 
ed when the stipulated term comes to an end, when a definite pe- 
riod of production, such as a week or a month, has elapsed. But the 
labourer is not paid until after he has expended his labour-power, 
and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus-value. 
He has, therefore, produced not only surplus-value, which we for 
the present regard as a fund to meet the private consumption of 
the capitalist, but he has also produced, before it flows back to him 
in the shape of wages, the fund out of which he himself is paid, the 
variable capital; and his employment lasts only so long as he con- 
tinues to reproduce this fund. Hence, that formula of the economists, 
referred to in Chapter XVIII., which represents wages as a share 
in the product itself. 2 What flows back to the labourer in the shape 
of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced 



1 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des aut- 
res, ne peuvent les obtenir que par des echanges [purchases of commodities]. 
S'ils donnent cependant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en retourcontre 
ces produits nouveaux qui sont l'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes 
a epuiser bientot leur fonds de reserve; ils ne travaillent point, avons-nous 
dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler; on croirait done que chaque jour d' it 
voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lorsqu'il ne leur en restera plus, 
rien ne sera offert en echange aux ouvriers qui travaillent exclusivement 
pour eux.... Mais dans l'ordre social, la richesse a acquis la propriete de se 
reproduire par le travail d'autrui, et sans que son proprietaire y concoure. 
La richesse, comme le travail, et par le travail, donne un fruit annuel qui 
peut etre detruit chaque annee sans que le riche en devienne plus pauvre. 
Ce fruit est le revenu qui nait du capital" (Sismondi: "Nouv. Princ d'Econ. 
Pol." Paris, 1819, t. I, pp. 81-82.) 

2 "Wages as well as profits are to be considered, each of them, as really 
a portion of the finished product." (Ramsay, 1. c, p. 142.) "The share of the 
product which comes to the labourer in the form of wages." (J. Mill, "Elements, 
&amp;c." Translated by Parissot. Paris, 1823, p. 34.) 



568 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

by him. The capitalist, it is true, pays him in money, but this 
money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour. 
While he is converting a portion of the means of production into 
products, a portion of his former product is being turned into mon- 
ey. It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his 
labour-power this week or this year. The illusion begotten by the 
intervention of money vanishes immediately, if, instead of taking 
a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capi- 
talists and the class of labourers as a whole. The capitalist class is 
constantly giving to the labouring class order-notes, in the form 
of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter 
and appropriated by the former. The labourers give these order- 
notes back just as constantly to the capitalist class, and in this 
way get their share of their own product. The transaction is veiled 
by the commodity-form of the product and the money-form of the 
commodity. 

Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form 
of appearance of the fund for providing the necessaries of life, or 
the labour-fund which the labourer requires for the maintenance of 
himself and family, and which, whatever be the system of social 
production, he must himself produce and reproduce. If the labour- 
fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for 
his labour, it is because the product he has created moves constant- 
ly away from him in the form of capital. But all this does not alter 
the fact, that it is the labourer's own labour, realised in a product, 
which is advanced to him by the capitalist. 1 Let us take a peasant 
liable to do compulsory service for his lord. He works on his own 
land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. 
The 3 other days he does forced work on the lord's domain. He con- 
stantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, 
takes the form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by 
another person. But in return, his unpaid forced labour for the lord, 
on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour. 
If one fine morning the lord appropriates to himself the land, the 
cattle, the seed, in a word, the means of production of this peasant, 
the latter will thenceforth be obliged to sell his labour-power to 
the lord. He will, caeteris paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 
3 for himself, 3 for his lord, who thenceforth becomes a wages- 
paying capitalist. As before, he will use up the means of production 

1 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, 
it adds nothing to the funds for the maintenance of labour." (Cazenove in 
note to his edition of Malthus' "Definitions in Pol. Econ." London, 1853, 
p. 22.) 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 569 



as means of production, and transfer their value to the product. 
As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to re- 
production. But from the moment that the forced labour is changed 
into wage-labour, from that moment the labour-fund, which the 
peasant himself continues as before to produce and reproduce, takes 
the form of a capital advanced in the form of wages by the lord. 
The bourgeois economist whose narrow mind is unable to separate 
the form of appearance from the thing that appears, shuts his eyes 
to the fact, that it is but here and there on the face of the earth, 
that even now-a-days the labour-fund crops up in the form of 
capital. 1 

Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a 
value advanced out of the capitalist's funds, 2 when we view the 
process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal. 
But that process must have had a beginning of some kind. From our 
present standpoint it therefore seems likely that the capitalist, 
once upon a time, became possessed of money, by some accumula- 
tion that took place independently of the unpaid labour of others, 
and that this was, therefore, how he was enabled to frequent the 
market as a buyer of labour-power. However this may be, the mere 
continuity of the process, the simple reproduction, brings about 
some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, 
but the total capital. 

If a capital of £1,000 beget yearly a surplus-value of £200, 
and if this surplus-value be consumed every year, it is clear that 
at the end of 5 years the surplus-value consumed will amount to 
5 X £200 or the £1,000 originally advanced. If only a part, say one 
half, were consumed, the same result would follow at the end of 
10 years, since 10 x£l00 =£1,000. General Rule: The value of the 
capital advanced divided by the surplus-value annually consumed, 
gives the number of years, or reproduction periods, at the expira- 
tion of which the capital originally advanced has been consumed 
by the capitalist and has disappeared. The capitalist thinks, that 
he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e., 
the surplus-value, and is keeping intact his original capital; but 



1 "The wages of labour are advanced by capitalists in the case of less 
than one fourth of the labourers of the earth." (Rich. Jones: "Textbook of 
Lectures on the Pol. Econ. of Nations." Hertford, 1852, p. 36.) 

2 "Though the manufacturer" (i.e., the labourer) "has his wages ad- 
vanced to him by his master, he in reality costs him no expense, the val- 
ue of these wages being generally reserved, together with a profit, in the 
improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed." 
(A. Smith, 1. c, Book II., ch. Ill, p. 311.) 



570 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

what he thinks cannot alter facts. After the lapse of a certain num- 
ber of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal to the sum 
total of the surplus-value appropriated by him during those years, 
and the total value he has consumed is equal to that of his original 
capital. It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not 
changed, and of which a part, viz., the buildings, machinery, &amp;c, 
were already there when the work of his business began. But 
what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the 
value, of that capital. When a person gets through all his property, 
by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that property, 
it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of 
his debts. And so it is with the capitalist; when he has consumed the 
equivalent of his original capital, the value of his present capital 
represents nothing but the total amount of the surplus-value appro- 
priated by him without payment. Not a single atom of the value 
of his old capital continues to exist. 

Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the 
process of production, in other words simple reproduction, sooner 
or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated 
capital, or capitalised surplus-value. Even if that capital was orig- 
inally acquired by the personal labour of its employer, it sooner 
or later becomes value appropriated without an equivalent, the 
unpaid labour of others materialised either in money or in some oth- 
er object. We saw in Chapt. IV. -VI. that in order to convert mon- 
ey into capital something more is required than the production and 
circulation of commodities. We saw that on the one side the posses- 
sor of value or money, on the other, the possessor of the value-creat- 
ing substance; on the one side, the possessor of the means of pro- 
duction and subsistence, on the other, the possessor of nothing but 
labour-power, must confront one another as buyer and seller. The 
separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power 
from the objective conditions of labour, was therefore the real 
foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production. 

But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by 
the mere continuity of the process, by simple reproduction, the pe- 
culiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist 
production. On the one hand, the process of production incessant- 
ly converts material wealth into capital, into means of creating 
more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist. On the oth- 
er hand, the labourer, on quitting the process, is what he was on 
entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making 
that wealth his own. Since, before entering on the process, his own 
labour has already been alienated from himself by the sale of his 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 571 

labour-power, has been appropriated by the capitalist and incor- 
porated with capital, it must, during the process, be realised in 
a product that does not belong to him. Since the process of produc- 
tion is also the process by which the capitalist consumes labour- 
power, the product of the labourer is incessantly converted, not 
only into commodities, but into capital, into value that sucks 
up the value-creating power, into means of subsistence that buy 
the person of the labourer, into means of production that command 
the producers. 1 The labourer therefore constantly produces mate- 
rial, objective wealth, but in the form of capital, of an alien 
power that dominates and exploits him; and the capitalist as 
constantly produces labour-power, but in the form of a subjec- 
tive source of wealth, separated from the objects in and by 
which it can alone be realised; in short he produces the labourer, 
but as a wage-labourer. 2 This incessant reproduction, this 
perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua non of capitalist 
production. 

The labourer consumes in a two-fold way. While producing he 
consumes by his labour the means of production, and converts 
them into products with a higher value than that of the capital ad- 
vanced. This is his productive consumption. It is at the same time 
consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who bought it. 
On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for 
his labour-power, into means of subsistence: this is his individu- 
al consumption. The labourer's productive consumption, and his 
individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct. In the for- 
mer, he acts as the motive power of capital, and belongs to the 
capitalist. In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his 
necessary vital functions outside the process of production. The 
result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other, that the 
labourer lives. 

When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer 
is often compelled to make his individual consumption a mere in- 
cident of production. In such a case, he supplies himself with 



1 "This is a remarkably peculiar property of productive labour. What- 
ever is productively consumed is capital, and it becomes capital by con- 
sumption." (James Mill, 1. c, p. 242.) James Mill, however, never got on the 
track of this "remarkably peculiar property." 

2 "It is true indeed, that the first introducing a manufacture employes 
many poor, but they cease not to be so, and the continuance of it makes 
many." ("Reasons for a Limited Exportation of Wool." London, 1677, p. 19.) 
"The farmer now absurdly asserts, that he keeps the poor. They are indeed 
kept in misery." ("Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor Rates: or a Com- 
parative View of the Prices of Labour and Provisions." London, 1777, p. 31.) 



572 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



necessaries in order to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and 
water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel. His 
means of consumption, "in that case, are the mere means of con- 
sumption required by a means of production; his individual con- 
sumption is directly productive consumption. This, however, ap- 
pears to be an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist 
production. * 

The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, 
not the single capitalist, and the single labourer, but the capital- 
ist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process of produc- 
tion, but capitalist production in full swing, and on its actual so- 
cial scale. By converting part of his capital into labour-power, the 
capitalist augments the value of his entire capital. He kills two 
birds with one stone. He profits, not only by what he receives 
from, but by what he gives to, the labourer. The capital given in ex- 
change for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the con- 
sumption of which the muscles, nerves, bones, and brains of existing 
labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. Within 
the limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consump- 
tion of the working-class is, therefore, the reconversion of the means 
of subsistence given by capital in exchange for labour-power, 
into fresh labour-power at the disposal of capital for exploitation. 
It is the production and reproduction of that means of production 
so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself. The indi- 
vidual consumption of the labourer, whether it proceed within the 
workshop or outside it, whether it be part of the process of produc- 
tion or not, forms therefore a factor of the production and reproduc- 
tion of capital; just as cleaning machinery does, whether it be 
done while the machinery is working or while it is standing. The 
fact that the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his 
own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has no bearing on 
the matter. The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none 
the less a necessary factor in the process of production, because the 
beast enjoys what it eats. The maintenance and reproduction of the 
working-class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the 
reproduction of capital. But the capitalist may safely leave its 
fulfilment to the labourer's instincts of self-preservation and of 
propagation. All the capitalist cares for, is to reduce the labour- 
er's individual consumption as far as possible to what is strictly 
necessary, and he is far away from imitating those brutal South 



1 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had he really 
penetrated the secret of "productive consumption." 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 573 

Americans, who force their labourers to take the more substantial, 
rather than the less substantial, kind of food. * 

Hence both the capitalist and his ideological representative, 
the political economist, consider that part alone of the labourer's 
individual consumption to be productive, which is requisite for 
the perpetuation of the class, and which therefore must take 
place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to con- 
sume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure beyond that 
part, is unproductive consumption. 2 If the accumulation of capi- 
tal were to cause a rise of wages and an increase in the labourer's 
consumption, unaccompanied by increase in the consumption of 
labour-power by capital, the additional capital would be consumed 
unproductively. 3 In reality, the individual consumption of the 
labourer is unproductive as regards himself, for it reproduces noth- 
ing but the needy individual; it is productive to the capitalist 
and to the State, since it is the production of the power that creates 
their wealth. 4 

From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, even 
when not directly engaged in the labour-process, is just as much 
an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour. 
Even its individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere 
factor in the process of production. That process, however, takes 
good care to prevent these self-conscious instruments from leav- 
ing it in the lurch, for it removes their product, as fast as it is 
made, from their pole to the opposite pole of capital. Individual 
consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for their 
maintenance and reproduction: on the other hand, it secures by the 



1 "The labourers in the mines of S. America, whose daily task (the 
heaviest perhaps in the world) consists in bringing to the surface on their 
shoulders a load of metal weighing from 180 to 200 pounds, fro:n a depth of 
450 feet, live on bread and beans only; they themselves would prefer the 
bread alone for food, but their masters, who have found out that the men 
cannot work so hard on bread, treat them like horses, and compel them to 
eat beans; beans, however, are relatively much richer in bone-earth (phos- 
phate of lime) than is bread." (Liebig, 1. c, vol. 1, p. 194, note.) 

2 James Mill, 1. c, p. 238. 

3 "If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the 
increase of capital, no more could be employed, I should say that such in- 
crease of capital would be still unproductively consumed." (Ricardo, 1. c, 
p. 163.) 

4 "The only productive consumption, properly so called, is the con- 
sumption or destruction of wealth" (he alludes to the means of production) 
"by capitalists with a view to reproduction.... The workman ... is a produc- 
tive consumer to the person who employs him, and to the State, but not, 
strictly speaking, to himself." (Malthus 1 "Definitions, &amp;c," p. 30.) 



574 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

annihilation of the necessaries of life, the continued re-appearance 
of the workman in the labour-market. The Roman slave was held 
by fetters: the wage-labourer is bound to his owner by invisible 
threads. The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a 
constant change of employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract. 

In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever 
necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over the free labourer. 
For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed 
in machine making was, in England, forbidden, under grievous 
pains and penalties. 

The reproduction of the working-class carries with it the ac- 
cumulation of skill, that is handed down from one generation to 
another. 1 To what extent the capitalist reckons the existence of 
such a skilled class among the factors of production that belong to 
him by right, and to what extent he actually regards it as the real- 
ity of his variable capital, is seen so soon as a crisis threatens him 
with its loss. In consequence of the civil war in the United States 
and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton 
operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of 
work. Both from the working-class itself, and from other ranks of 
society, there arose a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national 
subscriptions, in order to enable the "superfluous" hands to emi- 
grate to the colonies or to the United States. Thereupon, The 
Times published on the 24th March, 1863, a letter from Ed- 
mund Potter, a former president of the Manchester Chamber of 
Commerce. This letter was rightly called in the House of Com- 
mons, the manufacturers' manifesto. 2 We cull here a few character- 
istic passages, in which the proprietary rights of capital over 
labour-power are unblushingly asserted. 

"He" (the man out of work) "may be told the supply of cotton- 
workers is too large .... and.... must .... in fact be reduced by a 
third, perhaps, and that then there will be a healthy demand for 
the remaining two-thirds.... Public opinion .... urges emigration. 
...The master cannot willingly see his labour supply being re- 
moved; he may think, and perhaps justly, that it is both wrong and 
unsound.... But if the public funds are to be devoted to assist 



1 "The only thing, of which one can say, that it is stored up and pre- 
pared beforehand, is the skill of the labourer.... The accumulation and stor- 
age of skilled labour, that most important operation, is, as regards the great 
mass of labourers, accomplished without any capital whatever." (Th. Hodg- 
skin: "Labour Defended, &amp;c, " p. 13.) 

2 "That letter might be looked upon as the manifesto of the manufac- 
turers." (Ferrand: "Motion on the Cotton Famine," H. o. C, 27th April, 1863.) 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 575 

emigration, he has a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest." 
Mr. Potter then shows how useful the cotton trade is, how the "trade 
has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population from Ireland and 
from the agricultural districts," how immense is its extent, how in 

the year 1860 it yielded -r^ ths of the total English exports, how, 

after a few years, it will again expand by the extension of the mar- 
ket, particularly of the Indian market, and by calling forth a plen- 
tiful supply of cotton at 6d. per lb. He then continues: "Some 
time... , one, two, or three years, it may be, will produce the quan- 
tity.... The question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth 
retaining? Is it worth while to keep the machinery (he means the 
living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly 
to think of parting with that? I think it is. I allow that the workers 
are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the masters; 
but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained 
power which cannot be replaced for a generation; the mere ma- 
chinery which they work might much of it be beneficially replaced, 
nay improved, in a twelvemonth. x Encourage or allow (!) the work- 
ing-power to emigrate, and what of the capitalist?... Take away 
the cream of the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a great 
degree, and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with 
the short supply of inferior labour.... We are told the workers 
wish it" (emigration). "Very natural it is that they should do so.... 
Reduce, compress the cotton trade by taking away its working 
power and reducing their wages expenditure, say one-fifth, or five 
millions, and what then would happen to the class above, the 
small shopkeepers; and what of the rents, the cottage rents.... 
Trace out the effects upward to the small farmer, the better 
householder, and.... the landowner, and say if there could be 
any suggestion more suicidal to all classes of the country than by 
enfeebling a nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing 
population, and destroying the value of some of its most productive 

1 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another 
song, under ordinary circumstances, when there is a question of reducing 
wages. Then the masters exclaim with one voice: "The factory operatives 
should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really alow 
species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, 
or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which, by a short training of the 
least expert, can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired.... The 
master's machinery" (which we now learn can be replaced with advantage 
in 12 months) "really plays a far more important part in the business of 
production than the labour and skill of the operative" (who cannot now be- 
replaced under 30 years), "which six months' education can teach, and a com- 
mon labourer can learn." (See ante, p. 423.) 



576 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

capital and enrichment I advise a loan (of five or six millions 

sterling), . . . extending it may be over two or three years, 
administered by special commissioners added to the Boards of 
Guardians in the cotton districts, under special legislative regu- 
lations, enforcing some occupation or labour, as a means of keep- 
ing up at least the moral standard of the recipients of the loan... 
can anything be worse for landowners or masters than parting 
with the best of the workers, and demoralising and disappointing 
the rest by an extended depletive emigration, a depletion of capi- 
tal and value in an entire province?" 

Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distin- 
guishes two sorts of "machinery," each of which belongs to the 
capitalist, and of which one stands in his factory, the other at 
night-time and on Sundays is housed outside the factory, in cot- 
tages. The one is inanimate, the other living. The inanimate ma- 
chinery not only wears out and depreciates from day to day, but 
a great part of it becomes so quickly super-annuated, by con- 
stant technical progress, that it can be replaced with advantage 
by new machinery after a few months. The living machinery, on 
the contrary, gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion as 
the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates. The 
Times answered the cotton lord as follows: 

"Mr. Edmund Potter is so impressed with the exceptional 
and supreme importance of the cotton masters that, in order to 
preserve this class and perpetuate their profession, he would keep 
half a million of the labouring class confined in a great moral 
workhouse against their will. 'Is the trade worth retaining?' asks 
Mr. Potter. 'Certainly by all honest means it is,' we answer. 'Is 
it worth while keeping the machinery in order?' again asks Mr. 
Potter. Here we hesitate. By the 'machinery' Mr. Potter means the 
human machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean 
to use them as an absolute property. We must confess that we do 
not think it 'worth while,' or even possible, to keep the human ma- 
chinery in order — that is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is 
wanted. Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub 
it as you may. Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have 
just seen, get the steam up of its own accord, and burst or run 
amuck in our great towns. It might, as Mr. Potter says, requiresome 
time to reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capital- 
ists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard, industrious men 
wherewith to improvise more master-manufacturers than we can 
ever want. Mr. Potter talks of the trade reviving 'in one, two, or 
three years,' and he asks us not 'to encourage or allow (!) the work- 



SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 577 

ing power to emigrate.' He says that it is very natural the workers 
should wish to emigrate; but he thinks that in spite of their de- 
sire, the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with 
their 700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts; and as a 
necessary consequence, he must of course think that the nation 
ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sustain them 
by alms — and upon the chance that the cotton masters may some 
day want them. ... The time is come when the great public opinion 
of these islands must operate to save this 'working power' from 
those who would deal with it as they would deal with iron, and 
coal, and cotton." 

The Times' article was only a jeu d' esprit. The 'great pub- 
lic opinion" was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion, that the factory 
operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. Their 
emigration was prevented. l They were locked up in that "moral 
workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, as before, 'the 
strength" of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire. 

Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the sep- 
aration between labour-power and the means of labour. It there- 
by reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the la- 
bourer. It incessantly forces him to sell his labour-power in order 
to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in or- 
der that he may enrich himself. 2 It is no longer a mere accident, 
that capitalist and labourer confront each other in the market as 
buyer and seller. It is the process itself that incessantly hurls back 
the labourer on to the market as a vendor of his labour-power, and 
that incessantly converts his own product into a means by which 
another man can purchase him. In reality, the labourer belongs to 
capital before he has sold himself to capital. His economic 
bondage 3 is both brought about and concealed by the periodic sale of 



1 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but 
simply passed some Acts empowering the municipal corporations to keep 
the operatives in a half-starved state, i.e., to exploit them at less than the 
normal wages. On the other hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke 
out, Parliament broke wildly through its usages and voted, straight off, 
millions for indemnifying the millionaire landlords, whose farmers in any 
event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the price of meat The bull- 
like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Parliament, in 1866, 
showed that a man can worship the cow Sabala without being a Hindu, 
and can change himself into an ox without being a Jupiter. 

2 "L'ouvrier demandait de la subsistence pour vivre, le chef deman- 
dait du travail pour gagner." (Sismondi, 1. c , p. 91.) 

3 A boorishly clumsy form of this bondage exists in the county of 
Durham. This is one of the few counties, in which circumstances do not 
secure to the farmer undisputed proprietary rights over the agricultural 



578 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the 
market-price of labour-power. * 

Capitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of a contin- 
uous connected process, of a process of reproduction, produces not 
only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces 
and reproduces the capitalist relation; on the one side the capital- 
ist, on the other the wage-labourer. 2 



labourer. The mining industry allows the latter some choice. In this coun- 
ty, the farmer, contrary to the custom elsewhere, rents only such farms as 
have on them labourers' cottages. The rent of the cottage is a part of the 
wages. These cottages are known as "hinds' houses." They are let to the la- 
bourers in consideration of certain feudal services, under a contract called 
"bondage," which, amongst other things, binds the labourer, during the 
time he is employed elsewhere, to leave some one, say his daughter, &amp;c, to 
supply his place. The labourer himself is called a "bondsman." The rela- 
tionship here set up also shows how individual consumption by the labourer 
becomes consumption on behalf of capital — or productive consumption— 
from quite a new point of view: "It is curious to observe that the very dung 
of the hind and bondsman is the perquisite of the calculating lord ...and 
the lord will allow no privy but his own to exist in the neighbourhood, and 
will rather give a bit of manure here and there for a garden than bate any 
part of his seigneurial right." ("Public Health, Report VII., 1864," p. 188.) 

1 It will not be forgotten, that, with respect to the labour of children, 
&amp;c, even the formality of a voluntary sale disappears. 

2 "Capital pre-supposes wage-labour, and wage-labour pre-supposes 
capital. One is a necessary condition to the existence of the other; they mu- 
tually call each other into existence. Does an operative in a cotton-factory 
produce nothing but cotton goods? No, he produces capital. He produces 
values that give fresh command over his labour, and that, by means of such 
command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx: "Lohnarbeit und Kapital," in 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 266, 7th April, 1849.) The articles pub- 
lished under the above title in the N. Rh. Z. are parts of some lectures 
given by me on that subject, in 1847, in the German "Arbeiter-Verein" at 
Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the revolution of 
February. 



579 



CHAPTER XXIV 
CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 

SECTION 1.— CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON 

A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. 

TRANSITION OF THE LAWS OF 

PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE PRODUCTION OF 

COMMODITIES INTO LAWS 

OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION 

Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates 
from capital; we have now to see how capital arises from sur- 
plus-value. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it 
into capital, is called accumulation of capital. 1 

First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of 
the individual capitalist. Suppose a spinner to have advanced a 
capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8,000) are laid out in 
cotton, machinery, &amp;c, and one-fifth (£2,000) in wages. Let him 
produce 240,000 lbs. of yarn annually, having a value of £12,000. 
The rate of surplus-value being 100%, the surplus-value lies in the 
surplus or net product of 40,000 lbs. of yarn, one-sixth of the gross 
product, with a value of £2,000 which will be realised by a sale. 
£2,000 is £2,000. We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money 
a trace of surplus-value. When we know that a given value is sur- 
plus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not 
alter the nature either of value or of money. 

In order to convert this additional sum of £2,000 into capital, 
the master-spinner will, all circumstances remaining as before, 
advance four- fifths of it (£1,600) in the purchase of cotton, &amp;c, and 
one-fifth (£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who will 



1 "Accumulation of capital; the employment of a portion of revenue 
as capital." (Malthusf "Definitions, &amp;c," ed. Cazenove, p. 11.) "Conversion 
of revenue into capital." (Malthus: "Princ. of Pol. Econ.," 2nd Ed., Lond., 
1836, p. 320.) 



580 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

find in the market the necessaries of life whose value the master 
has advanced to them. Then the new capital of £2,000 functions in 
the spinning-mill, and brings in, in its turn, a surplus-value of 
£400. 

The capital-value was originally advanced in the money-form. 
The surplus-value on the contrary is, originally, the value of a 
definite portion of the gross product. If this gross product be sold, 
converted into money, the capital-value regains its original form. 
From this moment the capital-value and the surplus-value are both 
of them sums of money , and their reconversion into capital takes 
place in precisely the same way. The one, as well as the other, is 
laid out by the capitalist in the purchase of commodities that place 
him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of his goods, 
and this time, on an extended scale. But in order to be able to buy 
those commodities, he must find them ready in the market. 

His own yarns circulate, only because he brings his annual 
product to market, as all other capitalists likewise do with their 
commodities. But these commodities, before coming to market, 
were part of the general annual product, part of the total mass of 
objects of every kind, into which the sum of the individual capi- 
tals, i.e., the total capital of society, had been converted in the 
course of the year, and of which each capitalist had in hand only 
an aliquot part. The transactions in the market effectuate only 
the interchange of the individual components of this annual prod- 
uct, transfer them from one hand to another, but can neither aug- 
ment the total annual production, nor alter the nature of the objects 
produced. Hence the use that can be made of the total annual 
product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in no 
way upon circulation. 

The annual production must in the first place furnish all those 
objects (use-values) from which the material components of cap- 
ital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced. Deduct- 
ing these there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the 
surplus-value lies. And of what does this surplus-product consist? 
Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the 
capitalist class, things which, consequently, enter into the consump- 
tion-fund of the capitalists? Were that the case, the cup of surplus- 
value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple 
reproduction would ever take place. 

To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the sur- 
plus-product into capital. But we cannot, except by a miracle, con- 
vert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in 
the labour-process (i.e., means of production), and such further 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 581 

articles as are suitable for the sustenance of the labourer (i.e., 
means x&gt;i subsistence). Consequently, a part of the annual surplus- 
labour must have been applied to the production of additional 
means of production and subsistence, over and above the quantity 
of these things required to replace the capital advanced. In one 
word, surplus-value is convertible into capital solely because the 
surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the material 
elements of new capital. 1 

Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning 
as capital, the capitalist class requires additional labour. If the 
exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, 
either extensively or intensively, then additional labour-power 
must be found. For this the mechanism of capitalist production 
provides beforehand, by converting the working-class into a class 
dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only 
for its maintenance, but for its increase. It is only necessary for cap- 
ital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually sup- 
plied by the working-class in the shape of labourers of all ages, with 
the surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce, 
and the conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete. From 
a concrete point of view, accumulation resolves itself into the 
reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale. The 
circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, 
to use Sismondi's expression, changes into a spiral. 2 

Let us now return to our illustration. It is the old story: 
Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so on. The original 
capital of £10,000 brings in a surplus-value of £2,000, which is 
capitalised. The new capital of £2,000 brings in a surplus-value of 
£400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted into a second addi- 
tional capital, which, in its turn, produces a further surplus-value 
of £80. And so the ball rolls on. 

We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus- 
value consumed by the capitalist. Just as little does it concern us, 



1 We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation 
can change articles of luxury either into means of production or means of 
subsistence, and vice versa. In order to examine the object of our investi- 
gation in its integrity, free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, 
we must treat the whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist 
production is everywhere established and has possessed itself of every branch 
of industry. 

2 Sismondi's analysis of accumulation suffers from the great defect, 
that he contents himself, to too great an extent, with the phrase "conversion 
of revenue into capital," without" fathoming the material conditions of this 
operation. 



582 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

for the moment, whether the additional capital is joined on to the 
original capital, or is separated from it to function independently; 
whether the same capitalist, who accumulated it, employs it, or 
whether he hands it over to another. This only we must not forget, 
that by the side of the newly-formed capital, the original capital 
continues to reproduce itself, and to produce surplus-value, and 
that this is also true of all accumulated capital, and the addition- 
al capital engendered by it. 

The original capital was formed by the advance of £10,000. 
How did the owner become possessed of it? "By his own labour and 
that of his forefathers," answer unanimously the spokesmen of Po- 
litical Economy. 1 And, in fact, their supposition appears the only 
one consonant with the laws of the production of commodities. 

But it is quite otherwise with regard to the additional capi- 
tal of £2,000. How that originated we know perfectly well. There 
is not one single atom of its value-that does not owe its existence 
to unpaid labour. The means of production, with which the addi- 
tional labour-power is incorporated, as well as the necessaries with 
which the labourers are sustained, are nothing but component parts 
of the surplus-product, of the tribute annually exacted from the 
working-class by the capitalist class. Though the latter with a por- 
tion of that tribute purchases the additional labour-power even at 
its full price, so that equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet 
the transaction is for all that only the old dodge of every con- 
queror who buys commodities from the conquered with the money 
he has robbed them of. 

If the additional capital employs the person who produced it, 
this producer must not only continue to augment the value of the 
original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his previous la- 
bour with more labour than they cost When viewed as a transaction 
between the capitalist class and the working-class, it makes no 
difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the 
unpaid labour of the previously employed labourers. The capi- 
talist may even convert the additional capital into a machine 
that throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that 
replaces them by a few children. In every case the working-class 
creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined -to em- 
ploy additional labour in the following year. 2 And this is what is 
called: creating capital out of capital. 



1 "Le travail primitif auquelson capital a du sa naissance." Sismondi, 
1. c, ed. Paris, t. I., p 109. 

2 "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. G. Wake- 
field, "England and America." Lond., 1833, Vol. II, p. 110. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 583 

The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2,000 
pre-supposes a value of £10,000 belonging to the capitalist by vir- 
tue of his "primitive labour," and advanced by him. The second 
additional capital of £400 pre-supposes, on the contrary, only the 
previous accumulation of the £2,000, of which the £400 is the sur- 
plus-value capitalised. The ownership of past unpaid labour is 
thenceforth the sole condition for the appropriation of living un- 
paid labour on a constantly increasing scale. The more the capi- 
talist has accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate. 

In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capi- 
tal, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase of labour-power 
with part of the original capital, a purchase that conformed to the 
laws of the exchange of commodities, and that, from a legal stand- 
point, pre-supposes nothing beyond the free disposal, on the part 
of the labourer, of his own capacities, and on the part of the 
owner of money or commodities, of the values that belong to 
him; in so far as the additional capital, No. 2, &amp;c, is the mere re- 
sult of No. 1, and, therefore, a consequence of the above condi- 
tions; in so far as each single transaction invariably conforms to the 
laws of the exchange of commodities, the capitalist buying labour- 
power, the labourer selling it, and we will assume at its real val- 
ue; in so far as all this is true, it is evident that the laws of ap- 
propriation or of private property, laws that are based on the pro- 
duction and circulation of commodities, become by their own inner 
and inexorable dialectic changed into their very opposite. The 
exchange of equivalents, the original operation with which we start- 
ed, has now become turned round in such a way that there is only 
an apparent exchange. This is owing to the fact, first, that the cap- 
ital which is exchanged for labour-power is itself but a portion of 
the product of others' labour appropriated without an equivalent; 
and, secondly, that this capital must not only be replaced by its 
producer, but replaced together with an added surplus. The rela- 
tion of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer be- 
comes a mere semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, 
a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the transaction, and only 
mystifying it. The ever repeated purchase and sale of labour-power 
is now the mere form; what really takes place is this — the capital- 
ist again and again appropriates, without equivalent, a portion of 
the previously materialised labour of others, and exchanges it for 
a greater quantity of living labour. At first the rights of property 
seemed to us to be based on a man's own labour. At least, some 
such assumption was necessary since only commodity-owners with 
equal rights confronted each other, and the sole means by which 



584 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a man could become possessed of the commodities of others, was 
by alienating his own commodities; and these could be replaced by 
labour alone. Now, however, property turns out to be the right, 
on the part of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of 
others or its product, and to be the impossibility, on the part of 
the labourer, of appropriating his own product. The separation of 
property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a 
law that apparently originated in their identity. 1 

Therefore,* however much the capitalist mode of appropria- 
tion may seem to fly in the face of the original laws of commodity 
production, it nevertheless arises, not from a violation, but, on the 
contrary, from the application of these laws. Let us make this 
clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive phases of 
motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation. 

We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a 
sum of values into capital was achieved in complete accordance 
with the laws of exchange. One party to the contract sells his la- 
bour-power, the other buys it. The former receives the value of his 
commodity, whose use-value— labour — is thereby alienated to the 
buyer. Means of production which already belong to the latter are 
then transformed by him, with the aid of labour equally belonging 
to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his. 

The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used- 
up means of production. Useful labour cannot consume these means 
of production without transferring their value to the new prod- 
uct, but, to be salable, labour-power must be capable of supplying 
useful labour in the branch of industry in which it is to be em- 
ployed. 

The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent 
of the value of the labour-power together with a surplus-value. 
This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite 
length of time, say a day, a week, etc. — is less than the value created 
by its use during that time. But the worker has received payment 
for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has ali- 
enated its use-value — this being the case in every sale and purchase. 



1 The property of the capitalist in the product of the labour of others 
"is a strict consequence of the law of appropriation, the fundamental prin- 
ciple of which was, on the contrary, the exclusive title of every labourer 
to the product of his own labour." (Cherbuliez, "Richesse ou Pauvrete," 
Paris, 1841, p 58, where, however, the dialectical reversal is not properly 
developed.) 

* The following passage (to p. 587 "laws ol capitalist appropriation.") 
has been added to the English text in conformity with the 4th German edi- 
tion.—/^. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 585 

The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, pos- 
sesses the peculiar use-value of supplying labour, and therefore of 
creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity produc- 
tion. If, therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is 
not merely found again in the product, but is found there augment- 
ed by a surplus-value, this is not because the seller has been de- 
frauded, for he has really received the value of his commodity; 
it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has been used up 
by the buyer. 

The law of exchange requires equality only between the ex- 
change-values of the commodities given in exchange for one another. 
From the very outset it pre-supposes even a difference between their 
use-values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consump- 
tion, which only begins after the deal is closed and executed. 

Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved 
in the most exact accordance with the economic laws of commod- 
ity production and with the right of property derived from them. 
Nevertheless, its result is: 

(1) that the product belongs to the capitalist and not to the 

worker; 

(2) that the value of this product includes, besides the value 

of the capital advanced, a surplus-value which costs 
the worker labour but the capitalist nothing, and 
which none the less becomes the legitimate prop- 
erty of the capitalist; 

(3) that the worker has retained his labour-power and can sell 

it anew if he can find a buyer. 

Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this 
first operation; each time money is converted afresh into capital. 
Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled 
to operate continuously. "Several successive acts of exchange 
have only made the last represent the first" (Sismondi, "Nouveaux 
Principes, etc.," p. 70). 

And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to 
stamp this first operation, in so far as it is conceived as an isolated 
process, with a totally changed character. "Of those who share the 
national income among themselves, the one side (the workers) 
acquire every year a fresh right to their share by fresh work; the 
others (the capitalists) have already acquired, by work done orig- 
inally, a permanent right to their share" (Sismondi, I. c, pp. 
[110J111). It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the 
only one in which primogeniture works miracles, 



586 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by repro- 
duction on an extended scale, by accumulation. In the former case 
the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in 
the latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only 
a portion of it and converting the rest into money. 

The surplus-value is his property; it has never belonged to any- 
one else. If he advances it for the purposes of production, the ad- 
vances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he 
first entered the market. The fact that on this occasion the funds 
are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers makes absolute- 
ly no difference. If worker B is paid out of the surplus-value which 
worker A produced, then, in the first place, A furnished that sur- 
plus-value without having the just price of his commodity cut by a 
halfpenny, and, in the second place, the transaction is no concern 
of B's whatever. What B claims, and has a right to claim, is that 
the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power. "Both 
were still gainers: the worker because he was advanced the fruits 
of his labour" (should read: of the unpaid labour of other workers) 
"before the work was done" (should read: before his own labour 
had borne fruit); "the employer (le maitre), because the labour of 
this worker was worth more than his wages" (should read: produced 
more value than the value of his wages). (Sismondi, 1. c, p. 135.) 

To be sure, the matter looks quite different if we consider 
capitalist production in the uninterrupted flow of its renewal, 
and if, in place of the individual capitalist and the individual 
worker, we view them in their totality, the capitalist class 
and the working-class confronting each other. But in so doing 
we should be applying standards entirely foreign to commodity 
production. 

Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other 
in commodity production. The relations between them cease on the 
day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded ex- 
pires. If the transaction is repeated, it is repeated as the result of a 
new agreement which has nothing to do with the previous one and 
which only by chance brings the same seller together again with the 
same buyer. 

If, therefore, commodity production, or one of its associated 
processes, is to be judged according to its own economic laws, we 
must consider each act of exchange by itself, apart from any connex- 
ion with the act of exchange preceding it and that following it. 
And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely between par- 
ticular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations 
between whole social classes. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 587 

However long a series of periodical reproductions and preced- 
ing accumulations the capital functioning to-day may have passed 
through, it always preserves its original virginity. So long as 
the laws of exchange are observed in every single act of exchange 
the mode of appropriation can be completely revolutionised with- 
out in any way affecting the property rights which correspond to 
commodity production. These same rights remain in force both at 
the outset, when the product belongs to its producer, who, ex- 
changing equivalent for equivalent, can enrich himself only by his 
own labour, and also in the period of capitalism, when social wealth 
becomes to an ever-increasing degree the property of those who are 
in a position to appropriate continually and ever afresh the unpaid 
labour of others. 

This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a 
free sale, by the labourer himself, of labour-power as a commodity. 
But it is also only from then onwards that commodity production is 
generalised and becomes the typical form of production; it is only 
from then onwards that, from the first, every product is produced 
for sale and all wealth produced goes through the sphere of cir- 
culation. Only when and where wage-labour is its basis does com- 
modity production impose itself upon society as a whole; but only 
then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities. To 
say that the supervention of wage-labour adulterates commodity 
production is to say that commodity production must not develop 
if it is to remain unadulterated. To the extent that commodity pro- 
duction, in accordance with its own inherent laws, develops fur- 
ther, into capitalist production, the property laws of com- 
modity production change into the laws of capitalist appropri- 
ation. l 

We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, 
all capital, whatever its original source, becomes converted into 
accumulated capital, capitalised surplus-value. But in the flood 
of production all the capital originally advanced becomes a van- 
ishing quantity (magnitude* evanescens, in the mathematical sense), 
compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.e., with the 
surplus-value or surplus-product that is reconverted into capital, 
whether it functions in the hands of its accumulator, or in thoso 
of others Hence, Political Economy describes capital in gen- 
eral as 'accumulated wealth" (converted surplus-value or reve* 



1 We may well, therefore, feel astonished at the cleverness of Prou- 
dhon, who would abolish capitalistic property by enforcing the eternal laws 
of property that are based on commodity production! 



588 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

nue), "that is employed over again in the production of sur- 
plus-value," 1 and the capitalist as "the owner of surplus-value." 2 
It is merely another way of expressing the same thing to say 
that all existing capital is accumulated or capitalised interest, 
for interest is a mere fragment of surplus-value. 3 

SECTION 2.— ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION, 

BY POLITICAL ECONOMY, OF REPRODUCTION 

ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE 

Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconver- 
sion of surplus-value into capital, we must brush on one side an 
ambiguity introduced by the classical economists. 

Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist buys 
with a part of the surplus-value for his own consumption, serve the 
purpose of production and of creation of value, so little is the labour 
that he buys for the satisfaction of his natural and social require- 
ments, productive labour. Instead of converting surplus-value into 
capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities 
and that labour, consumes or expends it as revenue. In the face 
of the habitual mode of life of the old feudal nobility, which, as 
Hegel rightly says, "consists in consuming what is in hand," and 
more especially displays itself in the luxury of personal retain- 
ers, it was extremely important for bourgeois economy to promul- 
gate the doctrine that accumulation of capital is the first duty of 
every citizen, and to preach without ceasing, that a man cannot 
accumulate, if he eats up all his revenue, instead of spending a 
good part of it in the acquisition of additional productive labourers, 
who bring in more than they cost. On the other hand the economists 
had to contend against the popular prejudice, that confuses capi- 
talist production with hoarding, 4 and fancies that accumulated 



1 "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." 
(Malthus, 1. c.) "Capital ... consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used 
with a view to profit." (R Jones: "An Introductory Lecture on Polit. Econ.," 
Lond., 1833, p. 16.) 

2 "The possessors of surplus-produce or capital." ("The Source and 
Remedy of the National Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell." 
Lond., 1821.) 

3 "Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, 
is so all engrossing that all the wealth in the world from which income is 
derived, has long ago become the interest on capital." (London, Economist, 
19th July, 1859.) 

4 "No political economist of the present day can by saving mean mere 
hoarding: and beyond this contracted and insufficient proceeding, no use 
of the term in reference to the national wealth can well be imagined, but 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 589 

wealth is either wealth that is rescued from being destroyed in its 
existing form, i.e., from being consumed, or wealth that is with- 
drawn from circulation. Exclusion of money from circulation 
would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while 
accumulation of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer 
tomfoolery. l The accumulation of commodities in great masses 
is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circula- 
tion. 2 It is true that the popular mind is impressed by the sight, 
on the one hand, of the mass of goods that are stored up for grad- 
ual consumption by the rich, 8 and on the other hand, by the for- 
mation of reserve stocks; the latter, a phenomenon that is common 
to all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell for a mo- 
ment, when we come to analyse circulation. Classical economy is 
therefore quite right, when it maintains that the consumption of 
surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labour- 
ers, is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation. 
But at this point the mistakes also begin. Adam Smith has made 
it the fashion, to represent accumulation as nothing more than 
consumption of surplus-products by productive labourers, which 
amounts to saying, that the capitalising of surplus-value consists 
in merely turning surplus-value into labour-power. Let us see 
what Ricardo, e.g., says: "It must be understood that all the pro- 
ductions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest 
difference imaginable whether they are consumed by those who 
reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce another value. When 
we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean 
is, that the portion of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is 
consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers. There 
can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased 
by non-consumption." 4 There can be no greater error than that 
which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A. Smith, 



that which must arise from a different application of what is saved, founded 
upon a real distinction between the different kinds of labour maintained by 
it." (Malthus, 1 c, pp. 38, 39.) 

1 Thus for instance, Balzac, who so thoroughly studied every shade ot 
avarice, represents the old usurer Gobseck as in his second childhood when 
he begins to heap up a hoard of commodities. 

2 "Accumulation of stocks ... non-exchange ... over-production." (Th. 
Corbet, I. c, p 104.) 

3 [n this sense Necker speaks of the "objets de faste et de somptuosite," 
of which "le temps a grossi ('accumulation," and which "les lois de propri- 
ety out [assembles dans une seuleclasse de la societe." (CEuvres de M. Neck- 
er, Paris and Lausanne, 1789, t. ii., p. 291.) 

4 Ricardo, I. c, p. 163, note. 



590 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

viz., that "the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added 
to capital, is consumed by productive labourers." According to 
this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes vari- 
able capital. So far from this being the case, the surplus-value, 
like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital and 
variable capital, into means of production and labour-power. La- 
bour-power is the form under which variable capital exists during 
the process of production. In this process the labour-power is it- 
self consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are 
consumed by the labour-power in the exercise of its function, la- 
bour. At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the la- 
bour-power, is converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not 
by "productive labour," but by the "productive labourer." Adam 
Smith, by a fundamentally perverted analysis, arrives at the 
absurd conclusion, that even though each individual capital is di- 
vided into a constant and a variable part, the capital of society 
resolves itself only into variable capital, i.e., is laid out exclu- 
sively in payment of wages. For instance, suppose a cloth manufac- 
turer converts £2,000 into capital. One portion he lays out in buy- 
ing weavers, the other in woollen yarn, machinery, &amp;c. But the peo- 
ple, from whom he buys the yarn and the machinery, pay for la- 
bour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole 
£2,000 are spent in the payment of wages, i.e. , until the entire prod- 
uct represented by the £2,000 has been consumed by productive 
labourers. It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies 
in the words "and so on," which send us from pillar to post. In 
truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its 
difficulties begin. 1 

The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so 
long as we keep in view merely the sum total of the year's produc- 
tion. But every single component of this product must be brought 
into the market as a commodity, and there the difficulty begins. 
The movements of the individual capitals, and of the personal rev- 
enues, cross and intermingle and are lost in the general change 
of places, in the circulation of the wealth of society; this dazes 
the sight, and propounds very complicated problems for solution. 
In the third part of Book II. I shall give the analysis of the real 



1 In spite of his "Logic," John St. Mill never detects even such faulty 
analysis as this when made by his predecessors, an analysis which, even from 
the bourgeois standpoint of the science, cries out for rectification. In every 
case he registers with the dogmatism of a disciple, the confusion of his mas- 
ter's thoughts. So here: "The capital itself in the long run becomes entirely 
wages, and when replaced by the sale of produce becomes wages again." 



CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 591 

bearings of the facts. It is one of the great merits of the Physio- 
crats, that in their Tableau economique they were the first to at- 
tempt to depict the annual production in the shape in which it 
is presented to us after passing through the process of circulation. l 
For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, 
acting in the interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to ex- 
ploit the doctrine of Adam Smith, viz., that the whole of that part 
of the surplus-product which is converted into capital, is consumed 
by the working-class. 

SECTION 3.— SEPARATION 

OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. 

THE ABSTINENCE THEORY 

In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the 
surplus-product) solely as a fund for supplying the individual 
consumption of the capitalist. In this chapter we have, so far, 
treated it solely as a fund for accumulation. It is, however, nei- 
ther the one nor the other, but is both together. One portion is 
consumed by the capitalist as revenue, 2 the other is employed as 
capital, is accumulated. 

Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of 
these parts, the smaller is the other. Cseteris paribus, the ratio 
of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. But 
it is by the owner of the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, 
that the division is made. It is his deliberate act. That part of the 
tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved 



1 In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumula- 
tion, Adam Smith, in many ways, not only made no advance, but even lost 
considerable ground, compared with his predecessors, especially by the Phys- 
iocrats. Connected with the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really won- 
derful dogma, left by him as an inheritance to Political Economy, the dogma, 
that the price of commodities is made up of wages, profit (interest) and rent, 
i.e., of wages and surplus-value. Starting from this basis, Storch naively con- 
fesses, "II est impossible de resoudre le prix necessaire dans ses elements les 
plus simples." (Storch, I.e., Petersb. Edit., 1815, t. ii., p. 141, note.) A fine 
science of economy this, which declares it impossible to resolve the price 
of a commodity into its simplest elements! This point will be further investi- 
gated in the seventh part of Book iii. 

2 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense: 
first, to designate surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yield- 
ed by capital; secondly, to designate the part of that fruit which is period- 
ically consumed by the capitalist, or added to the fund that supplies his 
private consumption I have retained this double meaning because it har- 
monises with the language of the English and French economists. 



592 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

by him, because he does not eat it, i.e., because he performs the 
function of a capitalist, and enriches himself. 

Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical 
value, and no right to that historical existence, which, to use an 
expression of the witty Lichnowsky, "hasn't got no date." And so 
far only is the necessity for his own transitory existence implied 
in the transitory necessity for the capitalist mode of production. 
But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and 
the enjoyment of them, but exchange-value and its augmentation, 
that spur him into action. Fanatically bent on making value ex- 
pand itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for pro- 
duction's sake; he thus forces the development of the productive 
powers of society, and creates those material conditions, which 
alone can form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society 
in which the full and free development of every individual forms 
the ruling principle. Only as personified capital is the capitalist 
respectable. As such, he shares with the miser the passion for 
wealth as wealth. But that which in the miser is a mere idiosyn- 
crasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of 
which he is but one of the wheels. Moreover, the development of 
capitalist production makes it constantly necessary to keep in- 
creasing the amount of the capital laid out in a given industrial 
undertaking, and competition makes the immanent laws of capi- 
talist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as 
external coercive laws. It compels him to keep constantly extend- 
ing his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, 
except by means of progressive accumulation. 

So far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital 
— endowed as capital is, in his person, with consciousness and a 
will— his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on ac- 
cumulation, just as in book-keeping by double entry, the private 
expenditure of the capitalist is placed on the debtor side of his 
account against his capital. To accumulate, is to conquer the world 
of social wealth, to increase the mass of human beings exploited 
by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway 
of the capitalist. 1 



1 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of 
the capitalist for his text, Luther shows very aptly that the love of power is 
an element in the desire to get rich. "The heathen were able, by the light 
of reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double-dyed* thief and murderer. 
We Christians, however, hold them in such honour, that we fairly worship 
them for the sake of their money ... Whoever eats up, robs, and steals the 
nourishment of another, that man commits as greata murder (so far as in him 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 593 

But original sin is at work everywhere. As capitalist produc- 
tion, accumulation, and wealth, become developed, the capital- 
ist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. He has a fellow- 
feeling for his own Adam, and his education gradually enables 
him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of the 
old-fashioned miser. While the capitalist of the classical type 
brands individual consumption as a sin against his function, and 
as "abstinence" fiom accumulating, the modernised capitalist is 
capable of looking upon accumulation as "abstinence" from pleas- 
ure. 

"Two souls, alas, do dwell within his breast; 

The one is ever parting from the other." 1 

At the historical dawn of capitalist production,— and every 
capitalist upstart has personally to go through this historical 
stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions. 
But the progress of capitalist production not only creates a world 
of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit system, 



lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a usurer, and 
sits the while safe on his stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on the 
gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has stolen guilders, if only 
there were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks 
in and share it. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves... I ittle thieves are 
put in the stocks, great thieves go flaunting in sold and silk... Therefore is 
there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (aher the devil) than a gripe- 
money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men. Turks, soldiers, and 
tyrants are also bad men, yet must they let the people live, and confess that 
they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay, must, now and then show pity to 
some. But a usurer and money-glutton ? such a one would have the whole 
world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so 
that he may have all to himself, and every one may receive from him as from 
a God, and be his serf for ever. To wear fine cloaks, golden chains, rings, to 
wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man... Usury is 
a great huge monster, like a were-wolf, who lays waste all, more than any Ca- 
cus, Gerion or Antus. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pi- 
ous, so that people may not see where the oxen have gone, that he drags back- 
wards into his den. But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of his pris- 
oners, and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set 
the oxen loose again from the villain. For Cacus means the villain that is a 
pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything. And will not own that he has 
done it, and thinks no one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn back- 
wards into his den, make it seem, from their foot-prints, that they have 
been let out. So the usurer would deceive the world, as though he were of use 
and gave the world oxen, which he, however, rends, and eats all alone... 
And since we break on the wheel, and behead highwaymen, murderers and 
housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on the wheel and kill,... 
hunt down, curse and behead all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. c.) 
1 See Goethe's "Faust." 



594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

a thousand sources of sudden enrichment. When a certain stage 
of development has been reached, a conventional degree of prodi- 
gality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a 
source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the "unfortunate" 
capitalist. Luxury enters into capital's expenses of representa- 
tion. Moreover, the capitalist gets rich, not like the miser, in 
proportion to his personal labour and restricted consumption, 
but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labour-power of others, 
and enforces on the labourer abstinence from all life's enjoyments. 
Although, therefore, the prodigality of the capitalist never pos- 
sesses the bona-fide character of the open-handed feudal lord's 
prodigality, but, on the contrary, has always lurking behind it 
the most sordid avarice and the most anxious calculation, yet 
his expenditure grows with his accumulation, without the one 
necessarily restricting the other. But along with this growth, 
there is at the same time developed in his breast, a Faustian con- 
flict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for 
enjoyment. 

Dr. Aikin says in a work published in 1795: "The trade of 
Manchester may be divided into four periods. First, when manu- 
facturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood." They 
enriched themselves chiefly by robbing the parents, whose chil- 
dren were bound as apprentices to them: the parents paid a high 
premium, while the apprentices were starved. On the other hand, 
the average profits were low, and to accumulate, extreme parsi- 
mony was requisite. They lived like misers, and were far from 
consuming even the interest on their capital. "The second period, 
when they had begun to acquire little fortunes, but worked as 
hard as before," — for direct exploitation of labour costs labour, 
as every slave-driver knows — "and lived in as plain a manner 
as before. . . . The third, when luxury began, and the trade 
was pushed by sending out riders for orders into every market 
town in the Kingdom It is probable that few or no capi- 
tals of £3,000 to £4,000 acquired by trade existed here before 1690. 
However, about that time, or a little later, the traders had got 
money beforehand, and began to build modern brick houses, in- 
stead of those of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 
18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who placed a pint of 
foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks 
and headshakings of all his neighbours. Before the rise of machin- 
ery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public house 
where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, 
and a penny for a screw of tobacco. It was not till 1758, and this 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 595 

marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was 
seen with an equipage of his own. "The fourth period," the last 
30 years of the 18th century, "is that in which expense and luxury 
have made great progress, and was supported by a trade extended 
by means of riders and factors through every part of Europe." x 
What would the good Dr. Aikin say if he could rise from his 
grave and see the Manchester of to-day? 

Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! 
"Industry furnishes the material which saving accumulates." 2 
Therefore, save, save, i.e., reconvert the greatest possible portion 
of surplus-value, or surplus-product into capital! Accumulation 
for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake: by 
this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission 
of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a single instant deceive itself 
over the birth-throes of wealth. 3 But what avails lamentation 
in the face of historical necessity? If to classical economy, the 
proletarian is but a machine for the production of surplus-value; 
on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a machine for 
the conversion of this surplus-value into additional capital. 
Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist 
in bitter earnest. In order to charm out of his bosom the awful 
conflict between the desire for enjoyment and the chase after 
riches, Malthus, about the year 1820, advocated a division of la- 
bour, which assigns to the capitalist actually engaged in produc- 
tion, the business of accumulating, and to the other sharers in 
surplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, the beneficed 
clergy, &amp;c, the business of spending. It is of the highest impor- 
tance, he says, "to keep separate the passion for expenditure and 
the passion for accumulation." 4 The capitalists having long been 
good livers and men of the world, uttered loud cries. What, ex- 
claimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr. Malthus 
preaches high rents, heavy taxes, &amp;c, so that the pressure of 
the spur may constantly be kept on the industrious by unproduc- 
tive consumers! By all means, production, production on a con- 
stantly increasing scale, runs the shibboleth; but "production will, 



1 Dr. Aikin: "Description of the Country from 30 to 40 miles round Man- 
chester." Lond., 1795, p. 182, sq, 

2 A. Smith: 1. c, bk. iii.. ch. iii. 

8 Even J. B. Say says: "Les epargnes des riches se font aux depens des 
pauvres." "The Roman proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of 
society.... It can almost be said that modern society lives at the expense of 
the proletarians, on what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sis- 
mondi: "Etudes, &amp;c," t. i., p. 24.) 

* Malthus, 1. c, pp. 319, 320. 



596 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on. Nor is it 
quite fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only 
to pinch others, who are likely, from their characters, if you can 
force them to work, to work with success." 1 Unfair as he finds it 
to spur on the industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of 
its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer's 
wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious." Nor does he for a 
moment conceal the fact, that the appropriation of unpaid labour 
is the secret of surplus-value. "Increased demand on the part 
of the labourers means nothing more than their willingness to 
take less of their own product for themselves, and leave a greater 
part of it to their employers; and if it be said, that this begets 
glut, by lessening consumption" (on the part of the labourers), 
"I can only reply that glut is synonymous with large profits." 2 
The learned disputation, how the booty pumped out of the 
labourer may be divided, with most advantage to accumulation, 
between the industrial capitalist and the rich idler, was hushed 
in face of the revolution of July. Shortly afterwards, the town 
proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the 
country proletariat in England began to set fire to farm-yards 
and corn-stacks. On this side of the Channel Owenism began to 
spread; on the other side, St. Simonism and Fourierism. The hour 
of vulgar economy had struck. Exactly a year before Nassau W. 
Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit (including 
interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, 
he had announced to the world another discovery. "I substitute," 
he proudly says, "for the word capital, considered as an instru- 
ment of production, the word abstinence." 3 An unparalleled 



1 "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, 
&amp;c," p. 67. 

2 1. c, p. 59. 

8 (Senior, "Principes fondamentaux de l'ficon. Pol." trad. Arrivabene. 
Paris, 1836, p. 308.) This was rather too much for the adherents of the old 
classical school. "Mr. Senior has substituted for it" (the expression, labour 
and profit) "the expression Labour and Abstinence. He who converts his rev- 
enue abstains from the enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. 
It is not the capital, but the use of the capital productively, which is the 
cause of profits." (John Cazenove,l. c, p. 130, Note.) John St. Mill, on the con- 
trary, accepts on the one hand Ricardo's theory of profit, and annexes on the 
other hand Senior's "remuneration of abstinence." He is as much at home 
in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea in the Hegelian contradiction, 
the source of all dialectic. It has never occurred to the vulgar economist to 
make the simple reflexion, that every human action may be viewed, as "ab- 
stinence" from its opposite. Eating is abstinence from fasting, walking, ab- 
stinence from standing still, working, abstinence from idling, idling, absti- 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 597 

sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy! It substitutes 
for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase— voild tout. 
"When the savage," says Senior, "makes bows, he exercises an 
industry, but he does not practise abstinence." This explains 
how and why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of 
labour were fabricated without abstinence on the part of the capi- 
talist. "The more society progresses, the more abstinence is de- 
manded," 1 namely, from those who ply the industry of appropri- 
ating the fruits of others' industry. All the conditions for carrying 
on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts 
of abstinence on the part of the capitalist. If the corn is not all 
eaten, but part of it also sown— abstinence of the capitalist. 
If the wine gets time to mature— abstinence of the capitalist. 2 
The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he "lends (!) the instru- 
ments of production to the labourer," that is, whenever by incor- 
porating labour-power with them, he uses them to extract sur- 
plus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eating them up, 
steam-engines, cotton, railways, manure, horses, and all; or as 
the vulgar economist childishly puts it, instead of dissipating 
"their value" in luxuries and other articles of consumption. 3 
How the capitalists as a class are to perform that feat, is a secret 
that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge. 
Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self- 
chastisement of this modern penitent of Vishnu, the capitalist. 
Not only accumulation, but the simple "conservation of a capital 
requires a constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it." 4 
The simple dictates of humanity therefore plainly enjoin the re- 
lease of the capitalist from this martyrdom and temptation, in the 



nence from working. &amp;c. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once 
in a way, over Spinoza's: "Determinate est Negatio." 

1 Senior, 1. c., p. 342. 

2 "No one... will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain 
a twelvemonth in the ground, or leave his wine in a cellar for years, instead 
of consuming these things or their equivalent at once ... unless he expects 
to acquire additional value, &amp;c." (Scrope, "Polit. Econ.,"edit. by A. Potter, 
New York, 1841, pp. 133-134.) 

3 "La privation que s'impose le capitaliste, en pretant (this euphemism 
used, for the purpose of identifying, according to the approved method of 
vulgar economy, the labourer who is exploited, with the industrial capi- 
talist who exploits, and to whom other capitalists lend money) ses instru- 
ments de production au travailleur, au lieu d'en consacrer la valeur a son pro- 
pre usage, en la transforment en objets d'utilite ou d'agrement." (G. de Mo- 
linari, 1. c, p. 36.) 

4 "La conservation d'un capital exige ... un effort constant pour regis- 
ter a la tentation de le consommer." (Courcelle-Seneuil, 1. c, p. 57.) 



598 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

same way that the Georgian slave-owner was lately delivered, by 
the abolition of slavery, from the painful dilemma, whether to 
squander the surplus-product, lashed out of his niggers, entirely 
in champagne, or whether to reconvert a part of it into more nig- 
gers and more land. 

In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, 
there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but, in varying de- 
grees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. By degrees 
more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more 
products have to be converted into means of production. This 
process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capi- 
tal, nor as the function of a capitalist, so long as the labourer's 
means of production, and with them, his product and means of 
subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of capital. 1 Richard 
Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor of Mai thus 
in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses 
this point well in the light of two important facts. Since the great 
mass of the Hindu population are peasants cultivating their 
land themselves, their products, their instruments of labour and 
means of subsistence never take "the shape of a fund saved from 
revenue, which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous proc- 
ess of accumulation." 2 On the other hand, the non-agricultural 
labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least- 
disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the mag- 
nates, to whom a portion of the agricultural surplus-product is ren- 
dered in the shape of tribute or rent. One portion of this product 
is consumed by the magnates in kind, another is converted, for 
their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury and such like 
things; while the rest forms the wages of the labourers, who own 
their implements of labour. Here, production and reproduction 
on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any 
intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful coun- 
tenance, the capitalist "abstainer." 



1 "The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly 
to the progress of national capital, change at different stages of their prog- 
ress, and are, therefore, entirely different in nations occupying different 
positions in that progress... Profits ... unimportant source of accumulation, 
compared with wages and rents, in the earlier stages of society... When a 
considerable advance in the powers of national industry has actually taken 
place, profits rise into comparative importance as a source of accumula- 
tion." (Richard Jones, "Textbook, &amp;c," pp. 16, 21.) 

2 1. c, p. 36, sq. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 599 

SECTION 4.— CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, 

INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL DIVISION 

OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, 

DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF ACCUMULATION. 

DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. 

PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR. 

GROWING DIFFERENCE IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED 

AND CAPITAL CONSUMED. MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED 

The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capi- 
tal and revenue being given, the magnitude of the capital accumu- 
lated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus- 
value. Suppose that 80 per cent, were capitalised and 20 per cent, 
eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 or £1,200, ac- 
cording as the total surplus-value has amounted to £3,000 or 
£1,500. Hence all the circumstances that determine the mass of 
surplus-value, operate to determine the magnitude of the accumu- 
lation. We sum them up once again, but only in so far as they 
afford new points of view in regard to accumulation. 

It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, 
in the first place, on the degree of exploitation of labour-power. 
Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally 
identifies the acceleration of accumulation due to increased pro- 
ductiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to increased 
exploitation of the labourer. 1 In the chapters on the production 
of surplus-value it was constantly pre-supposed that wages are at 
least equal to the value of labour-power. Forcible reduction of 
wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important 
a part, for us not to pause upon it for a moment. It, in fact, trans- 
forms, within certain limits, the labourer's necessary consumption- 
fund into a fund for the accumulation of capital. 

"Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive power; 
they are the price of a productive power. Wages do not contribute, 



x "Ricardo says: 'In different stages of society the accumulation ol cap- 
ital or of the means of employing' (i.e., exploiting) 'labour is more or less 
rapid, and must in all cases depend on the productive powers of labour. The 
productive powers of labour are generally greatest where there is an abun- 
dance of fertile land.' If, in the first sentence, the productive powers of la- 
bour mean the smallness of that aliquot part of any produce that goes to 
those whose manual labour produced it, the sentence is nearly identical, 
because the remaining aliquot part is the fund whence capital can, if the 
owner pleases, be accumulated. But then this does not generally happen, 
where there is most fertile land." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, 
&amp;c." pp. 74, 75.) 



POO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more 
than the price of tools contributes along with the tools them- 
selves. If labour could be had without purchase, wages 
might be dispensed with." 1 But if the labourers could live on 
air they could not be bought at any price. The zero of their cost 
is theiefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, 
although we can always approximate more and more nearly to it. 
The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of labour 
back towaids this zero. A writer of the 18th century, often quoted 
already, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce," only 
betrays the innermost secret soul of English capitalism, when he 
declares the historic mission of England to be the forcing down 
of English wages to the level of the French and the Dutch. 2 With 
other things he says naively: "But if our poor" (technical term for 
labourers) "will live luxuriously . . . then labour must, of 
course, be dear. . . . When it is considered what luxuries 
the manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, 
sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed linens, snuff, tobacco, 
&amp;c." 3 He quotes the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, 
who, with eyes squinting heavenward, moans: "Labour is one- 
third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor work hard, 
and fare hard, as to their food and clothing. Their chief diet is 
bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and dried fish; for they very seldom eat 
flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." 4 "To 
which may be added," our essayist goes on, "that their drink is 
either water or other small liquors, so that they spend very little 
money. . . . These things are very difficult to be brought about; 
but they are not impracticable, since they have been effected 



1 J. Stuart Mill: "Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political 
Economy," Lond., 1844, p. 90. 

2 "An Essay on Trade and Commerce," Lond., 1770, p. 44. The Times 
of December, 1866, and January, 1867, in like manner published certain 
outpourings of the heart of the English mine-owner, in which the happy lot 
of the Belgian miners was pictured, who asked and received no more than 
was strictly necessary for them to live for their "masters." The Belgian la- 
bourers have to suffer much, but to figure in The Times as model labourers! 
In the beginning of February, 1867, came the answer: strike of the Belgian 
miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead. 

3 1. c, pp. 44, 46. 

4 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, par- 
donable in one whose heart is so full. He nominally compares the life of the 
English and French manufacturing labourer, but in the words just quoted 
he is painting, as he himself confesses in his confused way, the French agri- 
cultural labourers. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 601 

both in France and in Holland." 1 Twenty years later, an Ameri- 
can humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias 
Count Rumford) followed the same line of philanthropy to the 
great satisfaction of God and man. His "Essays" are a cookery book 
with receipts of all kinds for replacing by somesuccedaneum the 
ordinary dear food of the labourer. The following is a particularly 
successful receipt of this wonderful philosopher: "5 lbs. of barlev- 

1 1 

meal, 7— d.; 5 lbs. of Indian corn, 6^-d.; 3d. worth of red her- 
ring, Id. salt, Id. vinegar, 2d. pepper and sweet herbs, in all 
20— d.; make a soup for 64 men, and at the medium price of 
barley and of Indian corn .... this soup may be provided at 
— d., the portion of 20 ounces." 2 With the advance of capitalistic 

production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson's ideal su- 
perfluous. 3 At the end of the 18th and during the first ten years 
of the 19th century, the English farmers and landlords enforced 
the absolute minimum of wage, by paying the agricultural labour- 
ers less than the minimum in the form of wages, and the remainder 
in the shape of parochial relief. An example of the waggish way in 



1 1. c, pp. 70, 71. Note in the 3rd German edition: To-day, thanks to the 
competition on the world-market, established since then, we have advanced 
much further. "If China," says Mr. Stapleton, M.P., to his constituents, "should 
become a great manufacturing country, I do not see how the manufactu- 
ring population of Europe could sustain the contest without descending to the 
level of their competitors." (Times, Sept. 3, 1873, p. 8.) The wished-for 
goal of English capital is no longer Continental wages but Chinese. 

2 Benjamin Thompson: "Essays, Political, Economical, and Philo- 
sophical, &amp;c," 3 vols., Loud., 1796-1802, vol. i.,p. 294. In his "The State of 
the Poor, or an History of the Labouring Classes in England, &amp;c," Sir F. M. 
Eden strongly recommends the Rumfordian beggar-soup to workhouse 
overseers, and reproachfully warns the English labourers that "many poor 
people, particularly in Scotland, live, and that very comfortably, for months 
together, upon oat-meal and barley-meal, mixed with only water and salt." 
(1. c, vol. i, book i., ch. 2., p. 503.) The same sort of hints in the 19th cen- 
tury. "The most wholesome mixtures of flour having been refused (by the 
English agricultural labourer) ... in Scotland, where education is better, 
this prejudice is, probably, unknown." (Charles H. Parry, M. D., "The Ques- 
tion of the Necessity of the Existing Corn Laws Considered." London, 1816, 
p. 69.) This same Parry, however, complains that the English labourer is 
now (1815) in a much worse condition than in Eden's time (1797). 

3 From the reports of the last Parliamentary Commission on adulter- 
ation of means of subsistence, it will be seen that the adulteration even of 
medicines is the rule, not the exception in England. E.g., the examination 
of 34 specimens of opium, purchased of as many different chemists in Lon- 
don, showed that 31 were adulterated with poppy heads, wheat-flour, gum. 
clay, sand, &amp;c. Several did not contain an atom of morphia. 



602 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



which the English Dogberries acted in their "legal" fixing of a 
wages tariff: "The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr. Burke, 
when they fixed the rate of wages; the squires of Berks evidently 
thought the labourers ought not to do so, when they fixed the rate 

of wages at Speenhamland, 1795 There they decide that 

'income (weekly) should be 3s., for a man,' when the gallon or half- 
peck loaf of 8 lbs. 11 oz. is at Is., and increase regularly till bread 
is Is. 5d.; when it is above that sum, decrease regularly till it 

be at 2s., and then his food should be-^-th less." 1 Before the Com- 
mittee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain A. Ben- 
nett, a large farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage- 
regulator, was asked: "Has any proportion of the value of daily 
labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate?" 
Answer: "Yes, it has; the weekly income of every family is made 
up to the gallon loaf (8 lbs. 11 oz.), and 3d. per head!. . . . The 
gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the main- 
tenance of every person in the family for the week; and the 3d. is 
for clothes, and if the parish think proper to fmd clothes, the 3d. 
is deducted. This practice goes through all the western part 
of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the country." 2 "For years," 
exclaims a bourgeois author of that time, "they (the farmers) 
have degraded a respectable class of their countrymen, by forcing 
them to have recourse to the workhouse .... the farmer, 
while increasing his own gains, has prevented any accumulation 
on the part of his labouring dependants." 3 The part played in 
our days by the direct robbery from the labourer's necessary con- 
sumption-fund in the formation of surplus-value, and, therefore, 
of the accumulation-fund of capital, the so-called domestic indus- 
try has served to show. (Ch. xv., sect. 8, c.) Further facts on this 
subject will be given later. 

Although in all branches of industry that part of the con- 
stant capital consisting of instruments of labour must be sufficient 
for a certain number of labourers (determined by the magni- 
tude of the undertaking), it by no means always necessarily 



1 G. B. Newnham (barrister-at-law): "A Review of the Evidence be- 
fore the Committee of the two Houses of Parliament on the Corn Laws." 
Lond., 1815, p. 20, note. 

2 1. c, pp. 19, 20. 

8 C. H. Parry, 1. c, pp. 77, 69. The landlords, on their side, not only 
"indemnified" themselves for the Anti-Jacobin War, which they waged in the 
name of England, but enriched themselves enormously. Their rents doubled, 
trebled, quadrupled, "and in one instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years.'* 
(1. c. pp. 100, 101.) 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 603 

increases in the same proportion as the quantity of labour em- 
ployed. In a factory, suppose that 100 labourers working 8 hours 
a day yield 800 working-hours. If the capitalist wishes to raise 
this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then 
he must also advance more capital, not merely for wages, but for 
instruments of labour. But he might also let the 100 labourers 
work 12 hours instead of 8, and then the instruments of labour 
already to hand would be enough. These would then simply be more 
rapidly consumed. Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater 
tension of labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus- 
value (i.e., the subject-matter of accumulation), without corre- 
sponding augmentation in the constant part of capital. 

In the extractive industries, mines, &amp;c, the raw materials 
form no part of the capital advanced. The subject of labour is 
in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished 
by Nature gratis, as in the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, 
&amp;c. In these cases the constant capital consists almost exclusively 
of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased 
quantity of labour (day and night shifts of labourers, e.g.). All 
other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will 
rise in direct proportion to the labour expended. As on the first 
day of production, the original produce-formers, now turned into 
the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Na- 
ture—still work together. Thanks to the elasticity of labour- 
power, the domain of accumulation has extended without any 
previous enlargement of constant capital. 

In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased 
without the advance of more seed and manure. But this advance 
once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself pro- 
duces a marvellous effect on the amount of the product. A greater 
quantity of labour, done by the same number of labourers as be- 
fore, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance 
in the instruments of labour. It is once again the direct action 
of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of greater 
accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital. 

Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every 
additional expenditure of labour pre-supposes a corresponding 
additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of 
instruments of labour. And as extractive industry and agriculture 
supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials and those 
of its instruments of labour, the additional product the former have 
created without additional advance of capital, tells also in fa- 
vour of the latter. 



(504 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

General result: by incorporating with itself the two primary 
creators of wealth, labour-power and the land, capital acquires 
a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements of 
its accumulation beyond the limits apparently fixed by its own 
magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of produc- 
tion, already produced, in which it has its being. 

Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is 
the degree of productivity of social labour. 

With the productive power of labour increases the mass of 
the products, in which a certain value, and, therefore, a surplus- 
value of a given magnitude, is embodied. The rate of surplus- 
value remaining the same or even falling, so long as it only falls 
more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the mass 
of the surplus-product increases. The division of this product 
into revenue and additional capital remaining the same, the con- 
sumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any 
decrease in the fund of accumulation. The relative magnitude of 
the accumulation-fund may even increase at the expense of the 
consumption-fund, whilst the cheapening of commodities places at 
the disposal of the capitalist as many means of enjoyment as for- 
merly, or even more than formerly. But hand-in-hand with the 
increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheap- 
ening of the labourer, therefore a higher rate of surplus-value, 
even when the real wages are rising. The latter never rise propor- 
tionally to the productive power of labour. The same value in 
variable capital therefore sets in movement more labour-power, 
and, therefore, more labour. The same value in constant capital 
is embodied in more means of production, i.e., in more instru- 
ments of labour, materials of labour and auxiliary materials; 
it therefore also supplies more elements for the production both 
of use-value and of value, and with these more absorbers of labour. 
The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same 
or even diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place. 
Not only does the scale of reproduction materially extend, but 
the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the 
value of the additional capital. 

The development of the productive power of labour reacts 
also on the original capital already engaged in the process of 
production. A part of the functioning constant capital consists 
of instruments of labour, such as machinery, &amp;c, which are not 
consumed, and therefore not reproduced, or replaced by new ones 
of the same kind, until after long periods of time. But every 
year a part of these instruments of labour perishes or reaches the 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 605 

limit of its productive function. It reaches, therefore, in that 
year, the time for its periodical reproduction, for its replacement 
by new ones of the same kind. If the productiveness of labour has, 
during the using up of these instruments of labour, increased (and 
it develops continually with the uninterrupted advance of science 
and technology), more efficient and (considering their increased 
efficiency), cheaper machines, tools, apparatus, &amp;c, replace the 
old. The old capital is reproduced in a more productive form, apart 
from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of la- 
bour already in use. The other part of the constant capital, raw 
material and auxiliary substances, is constantly reproduced in 
less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part 
annually. Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, 
works almost simultaneously on the new capital and on that al- 
ready in action. Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies 
the number of useful materials and the useful applications of 
those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital 
its sphere of investment. It teaches at the same time how to throw 
the excrements of the processes of production and consumption 
back again into the circle of the process of reproduction, and thus, 
without any previous outlay of capital, creates new matter for 
capital. Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the 
mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technol- 
ogy give capital a power of expansion independent of the given 
magnitude of the capital actually functioning. They react at the 
same time on that part of the original capital which has entered 
upon its stage of renewal. This, in passing into its new shape, incor- 
porates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was 
being used up. Of course, this development of productive power 
is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital. 
So far as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competi- 
tion, the burden falls on the labourer, in the increased exploita- 
tion of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification. 

Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of 
production consumed by it. On the other hand, the value and 
mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity 
of labour increase as the labour becomes more productive. Though 
the same quantity of labour adds always to its products only the 
same sum of new value, still the old capital-value, transmitted 
by the labour to the products, increases with the growing pro^ 
ductivity of labour. 

An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same 
number of hours with the same intensity; then they will both 



606 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



in a week create equal values. But in spite of this equality, an 
immense difference will obtain between the value of the week's 
product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty automaton, 
and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning-wheel. In the 
same time as the Chinaman spins one pound of cotton, the Eng- 
lishman spins several hundreds of pounds. A sum, many hundred 
times as great, of old values swells the value of his product, in 
which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus func- 
tion anew as capital. "In 1782," as Frederick Engels teaches us, 
"all the wool crop in England of the three preceding years, lay 
untouched for want of labourers, and so it must have lain, if 
newly invented machinery had not come to its aid and spun it." 1 
Labour embodied in the form of machinery of course did not di- 
rectly force into life a single man, but it made it possible for a 
smaller number of labourers, with the addition of relatively less 
living labour, not only to consume the wool productively, and put 
into it new value, but to preserve in the form of yarn, &amp;c, its 
old value. At the same time, it caused and stimulated increased 
reproduction of wool. It is the natural property of living labour, 
to transmit old value, whilst it creates new. Hence, with the in- 
crease in efficacy, extent and value of its means of production, con- 
sequently with the accumulation that accompanies the develop- 
ment of its productive power, labour keeps up and eternises an 
always increasing capital-value in a form ever new." 2 This natural 



1 Friedrich Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. 20. 

2 Classic economy has, on account of a deficient analysis of the labour- 
process, and of the process of creating value, never properly grasped this 
weighty element of reproduction, as may be seen in Ricardo; he says, e.g., 
whatever the change in productive power, "a million men always produce in 
manufactures the same value." This is accurate, if the extension and degree 
of intensity of their labour are given. But it does not prevent (this Ricardo 
overlooks in certain conclusions he draws) a million men with different 
powers of productivity in their labour, turning into products very different 
masses of the means of production, and therefore preserving in their products 
very different masses of value; in consequence of which the values of the prod- 
ucts yielded may vary considerably. Ricardo has, it may be noted in passing, 
tried in vain to make clear to J. B. Say, by that very example, the 
difference between use-value (which he here calls wealth or material 
riches) and exchange-value. Say answers: "Quant a la difficulte qu'eleve 
Mr. Ricardo en disant que, par des procedes mieux entendus un million 
de personnes peuvent produire deux fois, trois fois autant de richesses, 
sans produire plus de valeurs, cette difficulte n'est pas une lorsque Ton 
considere, ainsi qu'on le doit, la production comme un echange dans le- 
quel on donne les services productifs de son travail, de sa terre, et de 
ses capitaux, pour obtenir des produits. C'est par le moyen de ces services 
productifs, que nous acquerons tous les produits qui sont au monde. 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 607 

power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic property 
of capital, in which it is incorporated, just as the productive 
forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent properties 
of capital, and as the constant appropriation of surplus-labour 
by the capitalists, takes that of a constant self-expansion of 
capital. 

With the increase of capital, the difference between the capi- 
tal employed and the capital consumed increases. In other words, 
there is increase in the value and the material mass of the instru- 
ments of labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain-pipes, work- 
ing-cattle, apparatus of every kind that function for a longer or 
shorter time in processes of production constantly repeated, or 



Or ... noussommes d'autant plus riches, nos services productifs ont d'autant 
plus de valeur qu'ils obtiennent dans l'echange appele production une plus 
grande quantite de choses utiles." (J. B. Say, "Lettres a M. Malthus," Paris, 
1820, pp. 168, 169.) The "difficulte"— it exists for him, mt for Ricardo— 
that Say means to clear up is this: Why does not the exchange-value of the 
use-values increase, when their quantity increases in consequence of in- 
creased productive power of labour? Answer: the difficulty is met by calling 
use-value, exchange-value, if you please. Exchange-value is a thing that is 
connected one way or another with exchange. If therefore production is 
called an exchange of labour and means of production against the product, 
it is clear as day that you obtain more exchange-value in proportion as the 
production yields more use-value. In other words, the more use-values, e.g., 
stockings, a working-day yields to the stocking-manufacturer, the richer is 
he in stockings. Suddenly, however, Say recollects that "with a greater quan- 
tity" of stockings their "price" (which of course has nothing to do with their 
exchange-value!) falls "parce que la concurrence les (les producteurs) ob- 
lige a donner les produits pour ce qu'ils leur coutent." But whence does the 
profit come, if the capitalist sells the commodities at cost-price? Never 
mind! Say declares that, in consequence of increased productivity, every one 
now receives in return for a given equivalent two pairs of stockings instead 
of one as before. The result he arrives at, is precisely that proposition of Ri- 
cardo that he aimed at disproving. After this mighty effort of thought, he 
triumphantly apostrophises Malthus in the words: "Telle est, monsieur, la 
doctrine bien liee, sans laquelle il est impossible, je le declare, d'expliquer 
les plus grandes difficultes de l'economie politique, et notamment, comment 
il se peut qu'une nation soit plus riche lorsque ses produits diminuent de 
valeur, quoique la richesse soit de la valeur." (1. c, p. 170.) An English econ- 
omist remarks upon the conjuring tricks of the same nature that appear 
in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking make up in general that 
which M. Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he earnestly urges Mal- 
thus to teach at Hertford, as it is already taught 'dans plusieurs parties de 
l'Europe.' He says, ' Si vous trouvez une physionomie de paradoxe a toutes 
ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'ose croire qu'elles 
vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables.' Doubtless, and in conse- 
quence of the same process, they will appear everything else, except origi- 
nal." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, 
&amp;c, " pp. 116, 110.) 



608 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



that serve for the attainment of particular useful effects, whilst 
they themselves only gradually wear out, therefore only lose 
their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that value to the product 
only bit by bit. In the same proportion as these instruments 
of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the 
product, i.e., in the same proportion as they are wholly employed 
but only partly consumed, they perform, as we saw earlier, the 
same gratuitous service as the natural forces, water, steam, air, 
electricity, etc. This gratuitous service of past labour, when 
seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the 
advancing stages of accumulation. 

Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e., since 
the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc., takes the form of the 
active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists 
are full of praises of the services of dead and gone labour, which, 
according to the Scotch genius MacCulloch, ought to receive a 
special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, etc. 1 The 
powerful and ever-increasing assistance given by past labour to 
the living labour-process under the form of means of production 
is, therefore, attributed to that form of past labour in which it 
is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the worker himself, i.e., 
to its capitalistic form. The practical agents of capitalistic 
production and their pettifogging ideologists are as unable to 
think of the means of production as separate from the antag- 
onistic social mask they wear to-day, as a slave-owner to 
think of the worker himself as distinct from his character as a 
slave. 

With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the 
mass of the surplus-value produced is determined by the number 
of workers simultaneously exploited; and this corresponds, 
although in varying proportions, with the magnitude of the capi- 
tal. The more, therefore, capital increases by means of successive 
accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that 
is divided into consumption-fund and accumulation-fund. The 
capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the same 
time show more "abstinence." And, finally, all the springs of pro- 
duction act with greater elasticity, the more its scale extends 
with the mass of the capital advanced. 



1 MacCulloch took out a patent for "wages of past labour," long before 
.Senior did for "wages of abstinence." 



CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 609 

SECTION 5.— THE SO-CALLED LABOUR-FUND 

It has been shown in the course of this inquiry that capital is 
not a fixed magnitude, but is a part of social wealth, elastic and 
constantly fluctuating with the division of fresh surplus-value 
into revenue and additional capital. It has been seen further that, 
even with a given magnitude of functioning capital, the labour- 
power, the science, and the land (by which are to be understood, 
economically, all conditions of labour furnished by Nature inde- 
pendently of man), embodied in it, form elastic powers of capi- 
tal, allowing it, within certain limits, a field of action independ- 
ent of its own magnitude. In this inquiry we have neglected all 
effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce 
very different degrees of efficiency in the same mass of capital. 
And as we pre-supposed the limits set by capitalist production, 
that is to say, pre-supposed the process of social production in 
a form developed by purely spontaneous growth, we neglected any 
more rational combination, directly and systematically practi- 
cable with the means of production, and the mass of labour-power 
at present disposable. Classical economy always loved to conceive 
social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. 
But this prejudice was first established as a dogma by the arch- 
Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather- 
tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th 
century.' Bentham is among philosophers what Martin Tupper 
is among poets. Both could only have been manufactured in 
England. 2 In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena 



1 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham: "Theorie des Peines et 
des Recompenses," traduct. d'Et Dumont, 3eme edit. Paris, 1826, t. II, 
L. IV., ch. II 

2 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. Not even excepting our 
philosopher, Christian Wolff, in no time and in no country has the most home- 
spun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a way. The prin- 
ciple of utility was no discovery of Bentham. He simply reproduced in his 
dull way what Helvetius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 
18th century. To know what is useful for a dog, one must study dog-nature. 
This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle of utility. Apply- 
ing this to man, he that would criticise all human acts, movements, rela- 
tions, etc., by the principle of utility, must first deal with human nature in 
general, and then with human nature as modified in each historical epoch. 
Bentham makes short work of it. With the dryest naivete he takes the mod- 
ern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. 
Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is absolute- 
ly useful. This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present, and future. 
The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the name of 
religion the same faults that the penal code condemns in the name of the 



610 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of the process of production, as, e.g., its sudden expansions and 
contractions, nay, even accumulation itself, become perfectly 
inconceivable. 1 The dogma was used by Bentham himself, as 
well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc., for an apologet- 
ic purpose, and especially in order to represent one part of capi- 
tal, namely, variable capital, or that part convertible into la- 
bour-power, as a fixed magnitude. The material of variable capi- 
tal, i.e., the mass of the means of subsistence it represents for 
the labourer, or the so-called labour-fund, was fabled as a sepa- 
rate part of social wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. 
To set in motion the part of social wealth which is to function as 
constant capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means 
of production, a definite mass of living labour is required. This 
mass is given technologically. But neither is the number of labourers 
required to render fluid this mass of labour-power given (it changes 
with the degree of exploitation of the individual labour-power), 
nor is the price of this labour-power given, but only its mini- 
mum limit, which is moreover very variable. The facts that lie 
at the bottom of this dogma are these: on the one hand, the la- 
bourer has no right to interfere in the division of social wealth 
into means of enjoyment for the non-labourer and means of 
production. 2 On the other hand, only in favourable and exception- 



law. "Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it disturbs worthy people in 
their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. With such rubbish has the brave 
fellow, with his motto, "nulla dies sine linea," piled up mountains of books. 
Had I the courage of my friend, Heinrich Heine, I should call, Mr. Jeremy 
a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity. 

1 "Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of 
capital and a certain number of labourers as productive instruments of uni- 
form power, or operating with a certain uniform intensity... Those ... who 
maintain ... that commodities are the sole agents of production ... prove that 
production could never be enlarged, for it requires as an indispensable con- 
dition to such an enlargement that food, raw materials, and tools should 
be previously augmented; which is in fact maintaining that no increase of 
production can take place without a previous increase, or, in other words, 
that an increase is impossible." (S. Bailey: "Money and its Vicissitudes," 
pp. 58 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the point of view 
of the process of circulation. 

2 John Stuart Mill, in his "Principles of Political Economy," says: 
"The really exhausting and the really repulsive labours instead of being bet- 
ter paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of all... The more 
revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of 
remuneration... The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly 
proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they v would be, are gen- 
erally in an inverse ratio to one another." To avoid misunderstanding, 
let me say that although men like John Stuart Mill are to blame for the con- 
tradiction between their traditional economic dogmas and their modern 



CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 611 

al cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour-fund at 
the expense of the "revenue" of the wealthy. 

What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent 
the capitalistic limits of the labour-fund as its natural and social 
limits may be seen, e.g., in Professor Fawcett. 1 "The circulating 
capital of a country," he says, "is its wage-fund. Hence, if we 
desire to calculate the average money wages received by each 
labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital 
by the number of the labouring population." 2 That is to say, 
we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and 
then we affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total value 
of the "labour-fund" determined and vouchsafed to us by God and 
Nature. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number 
of labourers to find out again how much may come to each on 
the average. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. It did not pre- 
vent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath: "The aggregate 
wealth which is annually saved in England, is divided into two 
portions; one portion is employed as capital to maintain our 
industry, and the other portion is exported to foreign countries... 
Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the wealth 
which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own 
industry." 3 

The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, 
embezzled, because abstracted without return of an equivalent, 
from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, 
but in foreign countries. But with the additional capital thus 
exported, a part of the "labour-fund" invented by God and 
Bentham is also exported. 4 

tendencies, it would be very wrong to class Ihem with the herd ol vulgar 
economic apologists. 

1 H. Fawcett, Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge. "The Eco- 
nomic Position of the British Labourer." London, 1865, p. 120. 

2 I must here remind the reader that the categories, "variable and con- 
stant capital," were first used by me. Political Economy since the time of 
Adam Smith has confusedly mixed up the essential distinctions involved in 
these categories, with the merv formal differences, arising out of the process 
of circulation, of fixed and circulating capital. For further details on this 
point, see Book [I., Part N 

3 Fawcett, I. c, pp. 122. 123 

4 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the 
shape of emigrants, are annually exported from England. In the text, 
however, there is no question of the peculium of the emigrants, who are in 
great part not labourers. The sons ol farmers make up a great part ol them. 
The additional capital annually transported abroad to be put out at interest 
is in much greater proportion to the annual accumulation than the yearly 
emigration is to the yearly increase of population. 



612 



CHAPTER XXV 
THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 

SECTIONl .—THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR LABOUR-POWER THAT 

ACCOMPANIES ACCUMULATION, THE COMPOSITION OF CAPITAL 

REMAINING THE SAME 

In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of 
capital on the lot of the labouring class. The most important 
factor in this inquiry, is the composition of capital and the changes 
it undergoes in the course of the process of accumulation. 

The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold 
sense. On the side of value, it is determined by the proportion 
in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means 
of production, and variable capital or value of labour-power, 
the sum total of wages. On the side of material, as it functions 
in the process of production, all capital is divided into means 
of production and living labour-power. This latter composition 
is determined by the relation between the mass of the means 
of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour 
necessary for their employment on the other. I call the former the 
value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital. 
Between the two there is a strict correlation. To express this, 1 call 
the value-composition of capital, in so far as it is determined by 
its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the 
organic composition of capital. Wherever I refer to the composi- 
tion of capital, without further qualification, its organic com- 
position is always understood. 

The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch 
of production have, one with another, more or l^ss different com- 
positions. The average of their individual compositions gives 
us the composition of the total capital in this branch of production. 
Lastly, the average of these averages, in all branches of pro- 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 613 

duction, gives us the composition of the total social capital of a 
country, and with this alone are we, in the last resort, concerned 
in the following investigation. 

Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent 
or of the part invested in labour-power. A part of the surplus-value 
turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed 
into variable capital, or additional labour-fund. If we suppose 
that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composi- 
tion of capital also remains constant (i.e., that a definite mass of 
means of production constantly needs the same mass of labour- 
power to set it in motion), then the demand for labour and the 
subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly increase in the same 
proportion as the capital, and the more rapidly, the more rapidly 
the capital increases. Since the capital produces yearly a surplus- 
value, of which one part is yearly added to the original capital; 
since this increment itself grows yearly along with the augmenta- 
tion of the capital already functioning; since lastly, under spe- 
cial stimulus to enrichment, such as the opening of new markets, 
or of new spheres for the outlay of capital inconsequence of newly 
developed social wants, &amp;c, the scale of accumulation may be 
suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of the sur- 
plus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, the re- 
quirements of accumulating capital may exceed the increase of 
labour-power or of the number of labourers; the demand for labour- 
ers may exceed the supply, and, therefore, wages may rise. This 
must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed 
above continue. For since in each year more labourers are em- 
ployed than in its predecessor, sooner or later a point must be 
reached, at which the requirements of accumulation begin to sur- 
pass the customary supply of labour, and, therefore, a rise of wages 
takes place. A lamentation on this score was heard in England 
during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first half of the eighteenth 
centuries. The more or less favourable circumstances in which 
the wage-working class supports and multiplies itself, in no way 
alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. As simple 
reproduction constantly reproduces the capital-relation itself, 
i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage- workers 
on the other, so reproduction on a progressive scale, i.e., accumu- 
lation, reproduces the capital-relation on a progressive scale, 
more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, more wage- 
workers at that. The reproduction of a mass of labour-power, 
which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with capital for that 
capital's self-expansion; which cannot get free from capital, and 



614 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

whose enslavement to capital is only concealed by the variety 
of individual capitalists to whom it sells itself, this reproduction 
of labour-power forms, in fact, an essential of the reproduction 
of capital itself. Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase 
of the proletariat. 1 

Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam 
Smith, Ricardo, &amp;c, as mentioned earlier, inaccurately identi- 
fied accumulation with the consumption, by the productive 
labourers, of all the capitalised part of the surplus-product, or 
with its transformation into additional wage-labourers. As early 
as 1696 John Bellers says: "For if one had a hundred thousand 
acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, 
without a labourer, what would the rich man be, but a labourer? 
And as the labourers make men rich, so the more labourers there 
will be, the more rich men ... the labour of the poor being the mines 
of the rich." 2 So also Bernard de Mandeville at the beginning 
of the eighteenth century: "It would be easier, where property 
is well secured, to live without money than without poor; for who 
would do the work? .... As they [the poor] ought to be kept 
from starving, so they should receive nothing worth saving. If 
here and there one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, 
and pinching his belly, lifts himself above the condition he was 
brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably 
the wisest course for every person in the society, and for every 
private family to be frugal; but it is the interest of all rich na- 
tions, that the greatest part of the poor should almost never be 
idle, and yet continually spend what they get . . . Those 
that get their living by their daily labour . . . have nothing 
to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is 



1 Karl Marx, I. c, "A egalite d 'oppression des masses, plus un pays a de 
proletaires et plus il est riche." (Golins, "L'Economie Politique. Source des 
Revolutions et des Utopies pretendues Socialistes." Paris, 1857, t. III., 
p. 331.) Our "proletarian" is economically none other than the wage-labourer 
who produces and increases capital, and is thrown out on the streets, as 
soon as he is superfluous tor the needs of aggrandisement of "Monsieur capi- 
tal," as Pecqueur calls this person "The sickly proletarian of the primitive 
forest," is a pretty Roscherian tancy The primitive forester is owner of 
the primitive forest, and uses the primitive forest as his property with 

'the freedom ol an orang-outang He is not, therefore, a proletarian. This 
would only be the case, if the primitive forest exploited him, instead of 
being exploited by him As far as his health is concerned, such a man 
would well bear comparison, not only with the modern proletarian, but also 
with the syphilitic and scrofulous upper classes. But, no doubt, Herr Wil- 
helm Roscher, by "primitive forest" means his native heath of Luneburg. 

2 John Bellers, I. c, p. 2. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 615 

prudence to relieve, but folly to cure. The only thing then that 
can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate quan- 
tity of money, for as too little will, according as his temper is, 
either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will make 
him insolent and lazy . . . From what has been said, it is 
manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not allowed of, 
the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious poor; for 
besides, that they are the never-failing nursery of fleets and armies, 
without them there could be no enjoyment, and no product of any 
country could be valuable."To make the society" [which of course 
consists of non-workers] "happy and people easier under the 
meanest circumstances, it is requisite that great numbers of them 
should be ignorant as well as poor; knowledge both enlarges and 
multiplies our desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, 
the more easily his necessities may be supplied." 1 What Mande- 
ville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the 
mechanism of the process of accumulation itself increases, along 
with the capital, the mass of "labouring poor," i.e., the wage- 
labourers, who turn their labour-power into an increasing power 
of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by doing so 
must eternise their dependent relation on their own product, as 
personified in the capitalists. In reference to this relation of de- 
pendence, Sir F. M. Eden in his "The State of the Poor, an History 
of the Labouring Classes in England," says, "the natural produce 
of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we 
can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed but in consequence of 
some previous labour. A portion at least of the society must be 
indefatigably employed . . . There are others who, though 
they 'neither toil nor spin,' can yet command the produce of in- 
dustry, but who owe their exemption from labour solely to civili- 
sation and order . . . They are peculiarly the creatures of civil 
institutions, 2 which have recognised that individuals may acquire 

1 Bernard de Mandeville: "The Fable of the Bees," 5th edition, Lon- 
don, 1728. Remarks, pp. 212, 213, 328. "Temperate living and constant em- 
ployment is the direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness" [by which 
he most probably means long working-days and little means of subsistence], 
"and to riches and strength for the state" (viz., for the landlords, capitalists, 
and their political dignitaries and agents). ("An Essay on Trade and Com- 
merce," London, 1770, p. 54.) 

2 Eden should have asked, whose creatures then are "the civil insti- 
tutions"? From his standpoint of juridical illusion, he does not regard the 
law as a product of the material relations of production, but conversely 
the relations of production as products of the law. Linguet overthrew Montes- 
quieu's illusory "Esprit des lois" with one word: "L'esprit des lois, c'est la 
propriete." 



61Q CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

property by various other means besides the exertion of labour. 
. . . Persons of independent fortune . . . owe their superior 
advantages by no means to any superior abilities of their own, but 
almost entirely ... to the industry of others. It is not the pos- 
session of land, or of money, but the command of labour which 
distinguishes the opulent from the labouring part of the commu- 
nity . . . This [scheme approved by Eden] would give the people 
of property sufficient (but by no means too much) influence and 
authority over those who . . . work for them; and it would 
place such labourers, not in an abject or servile condition, but 
in such a state of easy and liberal dependence as all who know 
human nature, and its history, will allow to be necessary for their 
own comfort." 1 Sir F. M. Eden, it may be remarked in passing, 
is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth 
century that produced any work of importance. 2 



1 Eden, 1. c, Vol. I, book 1., chapter 1., pp. 1, 2, and preface, p. xx. 

2 If the reader reminds me of Malthus, whose "Essay on Population" 
appeared in 1798, I remind him that this work in its first form is nothing 
more than a schoolboyish, superficial plagiary of De Foe, Sir James Steuart, 
Townsend, Franklin, Wallace, &amp;c, and does not contain a single sentence 
thought out by himself. The great sensation this pamphlet caused, was due 
solely to party interest. The French Revolution had found passionate defend- 
ers in the United Kingdom; the "principle of population," slowly worked 
out in the eighteenth century, and then, in the midst of a great social cri- 
sis, proclaimed with drums and trumpets as the infallible antidote to the 
teachings of Condorcet, &amp;.c, was greeted with jubilance by the English oli- 
garchy as the great destroyer of all hankerings afler human development. 
Malthus, hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his 
book materials superficially compiled, and adding to it new matter, not 
discovered but annexed by him. Note further: Although Malthus was a par- 
son of the English State Church, he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — 
one of the conditions of holding a Fellowship in Protestant Cambridge Univer- 
sity: "Socios collegiorura maritos esse non permittimus, sed statim postquam 
quis uxorem duxerit, socius collegii desinat esse." ("Reports of Cambridge 
University Commission," p. 172.) This circumstance favourably distinguishes 
Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have shuffled off the com- 
mand enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, "Be fruitful and 
multiply," as their special Biblical mission in such a degree that they gen- 
erally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, 
whilst they preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of popu- 
lation." It is characteristic that the economic fall of man, the Adam's ap- 
ple, the urgent appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," 
as Parson Townsend waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and 
is monopolised by the Reverends of Protestant Theology, or rather of the 
Protestant Church. With the exception of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an orig- 
inal and clever writer, most of the population-theory teachers are Protes- 
tant parsons. For instance, Bruckner, "Theorie du Systeme animal," 
Leyde, 1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory is 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 617 

Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, 
which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers, 
their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endur- 
able, or, as Eden says: "easy and liberal." Instead of becoming more 
intensive with the growth of capital, this relation of dependence 



exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel between Quesnay and his pu- 
pil, the elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic; then Parson 
Wallace, Parson Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch- 
Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say nothing of lesser reverend scrib- 
blers in this line. Originally, Political Economy was studied by philoso- 
phers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume; by businessmen and statesmen, like 
Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, 
Franklin; and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men 
like Petty, Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. Even in the middle of the eight- 
eenth century, the Rev. Air. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused 
himself for meddling with the things of Mammon. Later on, and in truth 
with this very "principle oi population," struck the hour of the Protestant 
parsons. Petty, who regarded the population as the basis of wealth, and was, 
like Adam Smith, an outspoken foe to parsons, says, as if he had a presenti- 
ment of their bungling interference, "that Religion best nourishes when the 
Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best flour- 
isheth when lawyers have least to do." He advises the Protestant priests, there- 
fore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" them- 
selves by celibacy, "not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as 
they now stand shared out, will receive, that is to say, if there be places for 
about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed 
up 24,000 ministers, for then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, 
will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood, which they cannot do more 
easily than by persuading the people that the twelve thousand incumbents 
do poison or starve their souls, and misguide them in their way to Heaven." 
(Petty; : 'A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions," London, 16G7, u 57.) Adam 
Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of his time is shown by the 
following. In "A Letter toA. Smith, L.L.D. On the Life, Death, and Phi- 
losophy of his Friend, David Hume. By one of the People called Christians," 
4th Edition, Oxford, 1784, Dr. Home, Bishop of Norwich, reproves Adam 
Smith, because in a published letter to Mr. Strahan, he "embalmed his 
friend David" (sc. Hume); because he told the world how "Hume amused him- 
self on his deathbed with Lucian and Whist," and because be even had the 
impudence to write of Hume: "I have always considered him both in his 
life-time and since his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea of a per- 
fectly wise and virtuous man, as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will 
permit." The bishop cries out, in a passion: "Is it right in you. Sir, to hold 
up to our view as 'perfectly wise and virtuous,' the character and conduct 
of one, who seems to have been possessed with an incurable antipathy 
to all that is called Religion; and who strained every nerve to explode, 
suppress and extirpate the spirit of it among men, that its very name, if 
he could effect it, might no more be had in remembrance?" (1. c, p. 8.) "But 
let not the lovers of truth be discouraged. Atheism cannot be of long contin- 
uance." (P. 17.) Adam Smith, "had the atrocious wickedness to propagate 
atheism through the land (viz., by his "Theory of Moral Sentiments"). Upon 



618 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

only becomes more extensive, i.e., the sphere of capital's 
exploitation and rule merely extends with its own dimensions 
and the number of its subjects. A larger part of their own surplus- 
product, always increasing and continually transformed into 
additional capital, comes back to them in the shape of means 
of payment, so that they can extend the circle of their enjoyments; 
can make some additions to their consumption-fund of clothes, 
furniture, &amp;c, and can lay by small reserve-funds of money. 
But just as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a 
larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so 
little do they set aside that of the wage-worker. A rise in the price 
of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of capital, only 
means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden chain 
the wage-worker has already forged for himself, allow of a relax- 
ation of the tension of it. In the controversies on this subject the 
chief fact has generally been overlooked, viz., the differentia 
specifica of capitalistic production. Labour-power is sold to-day, 
not with a view of satisfying, by its service or by its product, the 
personal needs of the buyer. His aim is augmentation of his capi- 
tal, production of commodities containing more labour than he 
pays for, containing therefore a portion of value that costs him 
nothing, and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities 
are sold. Production of surplus-value is the absolute law of this 
mode of production. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it 
preserves the means of production in their capacity of capital, 
reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour 
a source of additional capital. * The conditions of its sale, whether 



the whole, Doctor, your meaning is good; but I think you will not succeed 
this time. You would persuade us, by the example of David Hume, Esq., 
that atheism is the only cordial for low spirits, and the proper antidote 
against the fear of death... You may smile over Babylon in ruins and congrat- 
ulate the hardened Pharaoh on his overthrow in the Red Sea." (1. c, pp. 21, 
22.) One orthodox individual, amongst Adam Smith's college friends, writes 
after his death: "Smith's well-placed affection for Hume ... hindered him 
from being a Christian.. When he met with honest men whom he liked... 
he would believe almost anything they said. Had he been a friend of the 
worthy ingenious Horrox he would have believed that the moon sometimes 
disappeared in a clear sky without the interposition of a cloud... He ap- 
proached to republicanism in his political principles." ("The Bee." By 
James Anderson, 18 Vols., Vol. 3, pp 166, 165, Edinburgh, 1791-93.) Parson 
Thomas Chalmers has his suspicions as to Adam Smith having invented 
the category of "unproductive labourers," solely for the Protestant parsons, 
in spite of their blessed work in the vineyard of the' Lord. 

1 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative and 
the labourer is the same; namely, the possibility of the employer realising 
a profit on the produce of their industry. If the rate of wages is such as to 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION gig 

more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the ne- 
cessity of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended 
reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. Wages, as we 
have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of 
a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the labourer. 
Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a fall- 
ing price of labour, &amp;c, such an increase only means at best a 
quantitative diminution of the unpaid labour that the worker 
has to supply. This diminution can never reach the point at which 
it would threaten the system itself. Apart from violent conflicts 
as to the rate of wages (and Adam Smith has already shown that 
in such a conflict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), 
a rise in the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capi- 
tal implies the following alternative: 

Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise 
does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. In this 
there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, "after these 
(profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to increase, 
but to increase much faster than before. ... A great stock, 
though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small 
stock with great profits." (1. c, ii, p. 189.) In this case it is evident 
that a diminution in the unpaid labour in no way interferes with 
the extension of the domain of capital. — Or, on the other hand, 
accumulation slackens in consequence of the rise in the price of 
labour, because the stimulus of gain is blunted. The rate of accu- 
mulation lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that 
lessening vanishes, i.e., the disproportion between capital and 
exploitable labour-power. The mechanism of the process of capi- 
talist production removes the very obstacles that it temporarily 
creates. The price of labour falls again to a level corresponding 
with the needs of the self-expansion of capital, whether the level 
be below, the same as, or above the one which was normal before 
the rise of wages took place. We see thus: In the first case, it is 
not the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the propor- 
tional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, which 
causes capital to be in excess, but conversely the excess of capital 
that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient. In the second 
case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute, or of the 
proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, 



reduce the master's gains below the average profit oi' capital, he will cease 
to employ them, or he will only employ them on condition of submission to 
a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. c, p. 241.) 



620 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

that makes capital insufficient; but, conversely, the relative 
diminution of capital that causes the exploitable labour-power, 
or rather its price, to be in excess. It is these absolute movements 
of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative move- 
ments of the mass of exploitable labour-power, and therefore 
seem produced by the latter' s own independent movement. To 
put it mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independ- 
ent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the depend- 
ent, not the independent, variable. Thus, when the industrial 
cycle is in the phase of crisis, a general fall in the price of commod- 
ities is expressed as a rise in the value of money, and, in the 
phase of prosperity, a general rise in the price of commodities, as 
a fall in the value of money. The so-called currency school con- 
cludes from this that with high prices too little, with low prices too 
much money is in circulation. Their ignorance and complete mis- 
understanding of facts 1 are worthily paralleled by the economists, 
who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying 
that there are now too few, now too many wage-labourers. 

The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the 
pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself simply 
to this: The correlation between accumulation of capital and rate 
of wages is nothing else than the correlation between the unpaid 
labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid labour 
necessary for the setting in motion of this additional capital. 
It is therefore in no way a relation between two magnitudes, 
independent one of the other: on the one hand, the magnitude of 
the capital; on the other, the number of the labouring population; 
it is rather, at bottom, only the relation between the unpaid and 
the paid labour of the same labouring population. If the quantity 
of unpaid labour supplied by the working-class, and accumulated 
by the capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion into 
capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then 
wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining equal, the un- 
paid labour diminishes in proportion. But as soon as this diminu- 
tion touches the point at which the surplus-labour that nourishes 
capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a reaction sets 
in: a smaller part of revenue is capitalised, accumulation lags, 
and the movement of rise in wages receives a check. The rise of 
wages therefore is confined within limits that not only leave in- 
tact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure its 
reproduction on a progressive scale. The law of capitalistic accu- 



Cf. Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," pp. 166, seq. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 621 

mulation, metamorphosed by economists into a pretended law 
of Nature, in reality merely states that the very nature of accumu- 
lation excludes every diminution in the degree of exploitation 
of labour, and every rise in the price of labour, which could se- 
riously imperil the continual reproduction, on an ever-enlarging 
scale, of the capitalistic relation. It cannot be otherwise in a mode 
of production in which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of 
self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, ma- 
terial wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the 
part of the labourer. As, in religion, man is governed by the 
products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is 
governed by the products of his own hand. 1 

SECTION 2.— RELATIVE DIMINUTION OF THE VARIABLE PART 
OF CAPITAL SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE PROGRESS 
OF ACCUMULATION AND OF THE CONCENTRATION 
THAT ACCOMPANIES IT 

According to the economists themselves, it is neither the 
actual extent of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the capital 
already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the 
constant growth of accumulation and the degree of rapidity of 
that growth. (Adam Smith, Book I., chapter 8.) So far, we have 
only considered one special phase of this process, that in which 
the increase of capital occurs along with a constant technical com- 
position of capital. But the process goes beyond this phase. 

Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, 
in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which the 
development of the productivity of social labour becomes the 
most powerful lever of accumulation. "The same cause," says 
Adam Smith, "which raises the wages of labour, the increase of 
stock, tends to increase its productive powers, and to make a 
smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work." 

Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, 
&amp;c, and from the skill of independent and isolated producers 



1 "It we now return to our first inquiry, wherein it was shown that 
capital itself is only the result of human labour ... it seems quite incom- 
prehensible that man can have fallen under the domination of capital, his 
own product; can be subordinated to it; and as in reality this is beyond dis- 
pute the case, involuntarily the question arises; How has the labourer been 
able to pass from being master of capital— as its creator — to being its 
slave?" (Von Thunen, "Der tsolierte Staat " Part ii., Section ii., Rostock, 1863, 
pp. 5, 6.) Ft is Thunen's merit to have asked this question. His answer is sim- 
ply childish. 



622 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

(shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively 
in the mass of their products), the degree of productivity of labour, 
in a given society, is expressed in the relative extent of the means 
of production that one labourer, during a given time, with the 
same tension of labour-power, turns into products. The mass of 
the means of production which he thus transforms, increases with 
the productiveness of his labour. But those means of production 
play a double part. The increase of some is a consequence, that of 
the others a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. 
E.g., with the division of labour in manufacture, and with the 
use of machinery, more raw material is worked up in the same time, 
and, therefore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary sub- 
stances enter into the labour-process. That is the consequence of 
the increasing productivity of labour. On the other hand, the mass 
of machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, 
&amp;c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. So 
also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, 
furnaces, means of transport, &amp;c. But whether condition or con- 
sequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as com- 
pared with the labour-power incorporated with them, is an expres- 
sion of the growing productiveness of labour. The increase of the 
latter appears, therefore, in the diminution of the mass of labour 
in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it, 
or in the diminution of the subjective factor of the labour-process 
as compared with the objective factor. 

This change in the technical composition of capital, this 
growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with 
the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected again 
in its value-composition, by the increase of the constant consti- 
tuent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. There 
may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a capital laid out in means 
of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power; later on, with 
the development of the productivity of labour, 80 per cent, in 
means of production, 20 per cent, in labour-power, and so on. 
This law of the progressive increase in constant capital, in propor- 
tion to the variable, is confirmed at every step (as already shown) 
by the comparative analysis of the prices of commodities, whether 
we compare different economic epochs or different nations in the 
same epoch. The relative magnitude of the element of price, which 
represents the value of the means of production only, or the constant 
part of capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of 
the other element of price that pays labour (the variable part 
of capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumulation. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 623 

This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared 
with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the capital, 
however, only shows approximately the change in the composi- 
tion of its material constituents. If, e.g., the capital-value em- 

7 1 

ployed to-day in spinning is -x- constant and -5- variable, whilst at 

1 1 

the beginning of the 18th century it was — constant and -j varia- 
ble, on the other hand, the mass of raw material, instruments 
of labour, &amp;c, that a certain quantity of spinning labour con^ 
sumes productively to-day, is many hundred times greater than 
at the beginning of the 18th century. The reason is simply 
that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does 
the mass of the means of production consumed by it increase, but 
their value compared with their mass diminishes. Their value 
therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass. 
The increase of the difference between constant and variable capi- 
tal, is, therefore, much less than that of the difference between the 
mass of the means of production into which the constant, and the 
mass of the labour-power into which the variable, capital is 
converted. The former difference increases with the latter, but in 
a smaller degree. 

But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative 
magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in 
doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magni- 
tude. Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided into 50 per 
cent, of constant and 50 per cent, of variable capital; later into 
80 per cent, of constant and 20 per cent, of variable. If in the mean- 
time the original capital, say £6,000, has increased to £18,000, 
its variable constituent has also increased. It was £3,000, it is 
now £3,600. But whereas formerly an increase of capital by 20 per 
cent, would have sufficed to raise the demand for labour 20 per 
cent., now this latter rise requires a tripling of the original 
capital. 

In Part IV. it was shown, how the development of the produc- 
tiveness of social labour pre-supposes co-operation on a large scale; 
how it is only upon this supposition that division and combination 
of labour can be organised, and the means of production econo- 
mised by concentration on a vast scale; how instruments of labour 
which, from their very nature, are only fit for use in common, 
such as a system of machinery, can be called into being; how huge 
natural forces can be pressed into the service of production; and 
how the transformation can be effected of the process of production 



624 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

into a technological application of science. On the basis of the 
production of commodities, where the means of production are 
the property of private persons, and where the artisan therefore 
either produces commodities, isolated from and independent of 
others, or sells his labour-power as a commodity, because he 
lacks the means for independent industry, co-operation on a large 
scale can realise itself only in the increase of individual capitals, 
only in proportion as the means of social production and the means 
of subsistence are transformed into the private property of capi- 
talists. The basis of the production of commodities can admit 
of production on a large scale in the capitalistic form alone. 
A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual 
producers of commodities, forms therefore the necessary prelim- 
inary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production. We had, 
therefore, to assume that this occurs during the transition from 
handicraft to capitalistic industry. It may be called primitive 
accumulation, because it is the historic basis, instead of the 
historic result of specifically capitalist production. How it itself 
originates, we need not here inquire as yet. It is enough that it 
forms the starting-point. But all methods for raising the social 
productive power of labour that are developed on this basis, are 
at the same time methods for the increased production of surplus- 
value or surplus-product, which in its turn is the formative 
element of accumulation. They are, therefore, at the same time 
methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of 
its accelerated accumulation. The continual re-transformation of 
surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increas- 
ing magnitude of the capital that enters into the process of pro- 
duction. This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of produc- 
tion, of the methods for raising the productive power of labour 
that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. 
If, therefore, a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears 
as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, 
the latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capi- 
tal. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the specifically 
capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capital- 
ist mode of production the accumulation of capital. Both these 
economic factors bring about, in the compound ratio of the impulses 
they reciprocally give one another, that change in the technical 
composition of capital by which the variable constituent becomes 
always smaller and smaller as compared with the constant. 

Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration 
of means of production, with a corresponding command over a 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 625 

larger or smaller labour-army. Every accumulation becomes 
the means of new accumulation. With the increasing mass of wealth 
which functions as capital, accumulation increases the concentra- 
tion of that wealth in the hands of individual capitalists, and 
thereby widens the basis of production on a large scale and of 
the specific methods of capitalist production. The growth of so- 
cial capital is effected by the growth of many individual capi- 
tals. All other circumstances remaining the same, individual 
capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of produc- 
tion, increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of 
the total social capital. At the same time portions of the original 
capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent 
capitals. Besides other causes, the division of property, within 
capitalist families, plays a great part in this. With the accumu- 
lation of capital, therefore, the number of capitalists grows to 
a greater or less extent. Two points characterise this kind of con- 
centration which grows directly out of, or rather is identical with, 
accumulation. First: The increasing concentration of the social 
means of production in the hands of individual capitalists is, 
other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase 
of social wealth. Second: The part of social capital domiciled 
in each particular sphere of production is divided among many 
capitalists who face one another as independent commodity- 
producers competing with each other. Accumulation and the 
concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered 
over many points, but the increase of each functioning capital 
is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old 
capitals. Accumulation, therefore, presents itself on the one hand 
as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of 
the command over labour; on the other, as repulsion of many 
individual capitals one from another. 

This splitting-up of the total social capital into many indi- 
vidual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from another, is 
counteracted by their attraction. This last does not mean that 
simple concentration of the means of production and of the com- 
mand over labour, which is identical with accumulation. It 
is concentration of capitals already formed, destruction of their 
individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capital- 
ist, transformation of many small into few large capitals. This 
process differs from the former in this, that it only pre-supposes 
a change in the distribution of capital already to hand, and func- 
tioning; its field of action is therefore not limited by the absolute 
growth of social wealth, by the absolute limits of accumulation. 



626 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because 
it has in another place been lost by many. This is centralisation 
proper, as distinct from accumulation and concentration. 

The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attrac- 
tion of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. A brief 
hint at a few facts must suffice. The battle of competition is fought 
by cheapening of commodities. The cheapness of commodities 
depends, ceteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and 
this again on the scale of production. Therefore, the larger capi- 
tals beat the smaller. It will further be remembered that, 
with the development of the capitalist mode of production, there 
is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital nec- 
essary to carry on a business under its normal conditions. The 
smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production 
which Modern Industry has only sporadically or incompletely 
got hold of. Here competition rages in direct proportion to the 
number, and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the an- 
tagonistic capitals. It always ends in the ruin of many small cap- 
italists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their con- 
querors, partly vanish. Apart from this, with capitalist produc- 
tion an altogether new force comes into play— the credit system, 
which* in its first stages furtively creeps in as the humble as- 
sistant of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or 
associated capitalists, by invisible threads, the money resources 
which lie scattered, over the surface of society, in larger or smaller 
amounts; but it soon becomes a new and terrible weapon in the 
battle of competition and is finally transformed into an enormous 
social mechanism for the centralisation of capitals. 

Gommensurately with the development of capitalist produc- 
tion and accumulation there develop the two most powerful 
levers of centralisation — competition and credit. At the same time 
the progress of accumulation increases the material amenable to 
centralisation, i.e., the individual capitals, whilst the expan- 
sion of capitalist production creates, on the one hand, the social 
want, and, on the other, the technical means necessary for those 
immense industrial undertakings which require a previous central- 
isation of capital for their accomplishment. To-day, therefore, 
the force of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and 
the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before. 



* Here (from "which in its first stages" to p. 628 "centralisation move- 
ment") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German 
edition.— Ed. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 627 

But if the relative extension and energy of the movement towards 
centralisation is determined, in a certain degree, by the magni- 
tude of capitalist wealth and superiority of economic mechanism 
already attained, progress in centralisation does not in any way 
depend upon a positive growth in the magnitude of social capital. 
And this is the specific difference between centralisation and con- 
centration, the latter being only another name for reproduction 
on an extended scale. Centralisation may result from a mere 
change in the distribution of capitals already existing, from a 
simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component 
parts of social capital. Here capital can grow into powerful 
masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from 
many individual hands. In any given branch of industry cen- 
tralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual 
capitals invested in it were fused into a single capital. 1 In a 
given society the limit would be reached only when the entire 
social capital was united in the hands of either a single capitalist 
or a single capitalist company. 

Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by ena- 
bling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their operations. 
Whether this latter result is the consequence of accumulation or 
centralisation, whether centralisation is accomplished by the 
violent method of annexation — when certain capitals become 
such preponderant centres of attraction for others that they shat- 
ter the individual cohesion of the latter and then draw the sep- 
arate fragments to themselves — or whether the fusion of a num- 
ber of capitals already formed or in process of formation takes 
place by the smoother process of organising joint-stock compa- 
nies — the economic effect remains the same. Everywhere the 
increased scale of industrial establishments is the starting-point 
for a more comprehensive organisation of the collective work of 
many, for a wider development of their material motive forces — 
in other words, for the progressive transformation of isolated 
processes of production, carried on by customary methods, into 
processes of production socially combined and scientifically ar- 
ranged. 

But accumulation, the gradual increase of capital by repro- 
duction as it passes from the circular to the spiral form, is clearly 
a very slow procedure compared with centralisation, which has 



1 [Note in the 4th German edition. — The latest English and American 
"trusts" are already striving to attain this goal by attempting to unite at 
least all the large-scale concerns in one branch of industry into one great 
joint-stock company with a practical monopoly.—/'. E.\ 



628 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

only to change the quantitative groupings of the constituent 
parts of social capital. The world would still be without rail- 
ways if it had had to wait until accumulation had got a few indi- 
vidual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of 
a railway. Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this 
in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies. 
And whilst centralisation thus intensifies and accelerates the 
effects of accumulation, it simultaneously extends and speeds those 
revolutions in the technical composition of capital which raise 
its constant portion at the expense of its variable portion, thus 
diminishing the relative demand for labour. 

The masses of capital fused together overnight by centrali- 
sation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more rapidly, 
thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumu- 
lation. Therefore, when we speak of the progress of social ac- 
cumulation we tacitly include — to-day — the effects of centrali- 
sation. 

The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accu- 
mulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly as 
vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, 
and industrial improvements in general. But in time the old 
capital also reaches the moment of renewal from top to toe, when 
it sheds its skin and is reborn like the others in a perfected tech- 
nical form, in which a smaller quantity of labour will suffice to 
set in motion a larger quantity of machinery and raw materials. 
The absolute reduction in the demand for labour which neces- 
sarily follows from this is obviously so much the greater, the 
higher the degree in which the capitals undergoing this process 
of renewal are already massed together by virtue of the central- 
isation movement. 

On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in 
the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer labourers 
in proportion to its magnitude. On the other hand, the old capi- 
tal periodically reproduced with change of composition, repels 
more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it. 

SECTION 3.— PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION 
OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION 
OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE ARMY 

The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as 
its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, 
under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 629 

under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its 
variable constituent. 1 

The specifically capitalist mode of production, the develop- 
ment of the productive power of labour corresponding to it, and 
the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capi- 
tal, do not merely keep pace with the advance of accumulation, 
or with the growth of social wealth. They develop at a much 
quicker rate, because mere accumulation, the absolute increase 
of the total social capital, is accompanied by the centralisation 
of the individual capitals of which that total is made up; and be- 
cause the change in the technological composition of the additional 
capital goes hand in hand with a similar change in the technologi- 
cal composition of the original capital. With the advance of accu- 
mulation, therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capi- 
tal changes. If it was originally say 1 : 1, it now becomes succes- 
sively 2 : 1, 3 : 1, 4 : 1, 5 : 1, 7 : 1, &amp;c, so that as the capital 

increases, instead of -~- of its total value, only 



2 _ .^ , „ MJ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , g , 

&amp;c, is transformed into labour-power, and, on the other hand, 
, into means of production. Since the demand for 



3 ' 4 ' 5 ' 6 ' 8 
labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but 
by its variable constituent alone, that demand falls progressively 
with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously 
assumed, rising in proportion to it. It falls relatively to the magni- 
tude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this 
magnitude increases. With the growth of the total capital, its 
variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it, also does 
increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion. The inter- 
mediate pauses are shortened, in which accumulation works as 
simple extension of production, on a given technical basis. It is 
not merely that an accelerated accumulation of total capital, 
accelerated in a constantly growing progression, is needed to 
absorb an additional number of labourers, or even, on account 
of the constant metamorphosis of old capital, to keep employed 
those already functioning. In its turn, this increasing accumula 
tion and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in the 



1 Note in the 3rd German edition. — In Marx's copy there is here the 
marginal note: "Here note for working out later; if the extension is only 
quantitative, then for a greater and a smaller capital in the same branch of 
business the profits are as the magnitudes of the capitals advanced. If the 
quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then the rate of profit 
on the larger capital rises simultaneously." — F. E. 



630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its 
variable, as compared with its constant constituent. This accel- 
erated relative diminution of the variable constituent, that goes 
along with the accelerated increase of the total capital, and moves 
more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the 
other pole, of an apparently absolute increase of the labouring 
population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that 
of the variable capital or the means of employment. But in fact, 
it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, 
and produces in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a rela- 
tively redundant population of labourers, i.e., a population of 
greater extent than suffices for the average needs of the self- 
expansion of capital, and therefore a surplus-population. 

Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement 
of its accumulation now causes periodical changes, affecting it 
more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simul- 
taneously over the different spheres of production. In some spheres 
a change in the composition of capital occurs without increase of 
its absolute magnitude, as a consequence of simple central- 
isation; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with 
absolute diminution of its variable constituent, or of the labour- 
power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing 
for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional 
labour-power in proportion to its increase, while at other times 
it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; 
in all spheres, the increase of the variable part of capital, and 
therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always 
connected with violent fluctuations and transitory production of 
surplus-population, whether this takes the more striking form of 
the repulsion of labourers already employed, or the less evident 
but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the addi- 
tional labouring population through the usual channels. x With 



1 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in 
agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners, shepherds, &amp;c, included): 1851, 
2,011,447: 1861, 1,924,110. Fall, 87,337. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 
102,714 persons: 1861, 79,242. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940: 1861, 101,678. 
Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098: 1861, 12,556. A small rise that, in the 
face of the enormous extension of this industry and implying a great fall 
proportionally in the number of labourers employed. Hat-making: 1851, 
15,957: 1861, 13,814. Straw-hat and bonnet-making: 1851, 20,393: 1861, 
18,176. Malting: 1851, 10,566: 1861, 10,677. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949: 1861, 
4,686. This fall is due, besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. 
Comb-making: 1851, 2,038: 1861, 1,478. Sawyers: 1851, 30,552: 1861,31,647— 
a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Nail-mak- 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 631 

the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and the de- 
gree of its increase, with the extension of the scale of production, 
and the mass of the labourers set in motion, with the development 
of the productiveness of their labour, with the greater breadth 
and fulness of all sources of wealth, there is also an extension of 
the scale on which greater attraction of labourers by capital is 
accompanied by their greater repulsion; the rapidity of the change 
in the organic composition of capital, and in its technical form 
increases, and an increasing number of spheres of production be- 
comes involved in this change, now simultaneously, now alter- 
nately. The labouring population therefore produces, along with 
the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by which 
itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative sur- 
plus-population; and it does this to an always increasing extent. * 



ing: 1851, 26,940: 1861, 26,130— fall in consequence of the competition 
of machinery. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360: 1861, 32,041. On the 
other hand: Cotton-spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777: 1861, 456,646. Coal- 
mining: 1851, 183,389: 1861, 246,613. "The increase of labourers is general- 
ly greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which machinery has 
not up to the present been employed with success." (Census of England and 
Wales for 1861. Vol. III. London, 1863, p. 36.) 

1 [Added in the 4th German edition.— The law of progressive diminu- 
tion of the relative magnitude of variable capital and its effect on the condi- 
tion of the class of wage-workers is conjectured rather than understood by 
some of the prominent economists of the classical school. The greatest service 
was rendered here by John Barton, although he, like all the rest, lumps togeth- 
er constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. He says:] "The 
demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed 
capital. Were it true that the proportion between these two sorts of capital 
is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows 
that the number of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the 
state. But such a proposition has not the semblance of probability. As arts are 
cultivated, and civilisation is extended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger 
proportion to circulating capital. The amount of fixed capital employed in 
the production of a piece of British muslin is at least a hundred, probably 
a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian 
muslin. And the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thousand 
times less ... the whole of the annual savings, added to the fixed capital, 
would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour." (John Barton, 
"Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the 
Labouring Classes of Society." London, 1817, pp. 16, 17.) "The same cause 
which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time ren- 
der the population redundant, and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." 
(Ricardo, 1. c, p. 469.) With increase of capital, "the demand [for labour] 
will be in a diminishing ratio." (ibid. p. 480, Note.) "The amount of capital 
devoted to the maintenance of labour may vary, independently of any changes 
in the whole amount of capital.... Great fluctuations in the amount of em- 
ployment, and great suffering: may become more frequent as capital itself 
becomes more plentiful." (Richard Jones, "An Introductory Lecture on Pol. 



632 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

This is a law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of 
production; and in fact every special historic mode of production 
has its own special laws of population, historically valid within 
its limits alone. An abstract law of population exists for plants 
and animals only, and only in so far as man has not interfered 
with them. 

But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product 
of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a capitalist 
basis, this surplus-population becomes, conversely, the lever of 
capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of existence of the 
capitalist mode of production. It forms a disposable industrial 
reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as if 
the latter had bred it at its own cost. Independently of the limits 
of the actual increase of population, it creates, for the changing 
needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human mate- 
rial always ready for exploitation. With accumulation, and the 
development of the productiveness of labour that accompanies 
it, the power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, 
not merely because the elasticity of the capital already function- 
ing increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society 
expands, of which capital only forms an elastic part, not merely 
because credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an 
unusual part of this wealth at the disposal of production in the 
form of additional capital; it grows, also, because the technical 
conditions of the process of production themselves — machinery, 
means of transport, &amp;c. — now admit of the rapidest transforma- 
tion of masses of surplus-product into additional means of pro- 
duction. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the advance 
of accumulation, and transformable into additional capital, 
thrusts itself frantically into old branches of production, whose 
market suddenly expands, or into newly formed branches, such as 
railways, &amp;c, the need for which grows out of the development 
of the old ones. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of 
throwing great masses of men suddenly on the decisive points 
without injury to the scale of production in other spheres. Over- 
population supplies these masses. The course characteristic of 
modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle (interrupted by smaller 
oscillations), of periods of average activity, production at high 



Econ.," Lond. 1833, p. 13.) "Demand [for labour] will rise ... not in propor- 
tion to the accumulation of the general capital.... Every augmentation, 
therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction, comes, in the 
progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condtition of the 
labourer." (Ramsay, 1. c, pp. 90, 91.) 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 633 

pressure, crisis and stagnation, depends on the constant forma- 
tion, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the 
industrial reserve army or surplus-population. In their turn, the 
varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus-popula- 
tion, and become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduc- 
tion. This peculiar course of modern industry, which occurs in 
no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the 
childhood of capitalist production. The composition of capital 
changed but very slowly. With its accumulation, therefore, there 
kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding growth in the demand 
for labour. Slow as was the advance of accumulation compared 
with that of more modern times, it found a check in the natural 
limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which 
could only be got rid of by forcible means to be mentioned later. 
The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the 
preliminary to its equally sudden contraction; the latter again 
evokes the former, but the former is impossible without dispos- 
able human material, without an increase in the number of la- 
bourers independently of the absolute growth of the population. 
This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly 
"sets free" a part of the labourers; by methods which lessen the 
number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased 
production. The whole form of the movement of modern industry 
depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part 
of the labouring population into unemployed or half-employed 
hands. The superficiality of Political Economy shows itself in 
the fact that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of cred- 
it, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the indus- 
trial cycle, as their cause. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown 
into a certain definite motion, always repeat this, so is it with 
social production as soon as it is once thrown into this move- 
ment of alternate expansion and contraction. Effects, in their 
turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole 
process, which always reproduces its own conditions, take on the 
form of periodicity. When this periodicity is once consolidated, 
even Political Economy then sees that the production of a rela- 
tive surplus-population — i.e., surplus with regard to the aver- 
age needs of the self-expansion of capital— is a necessary con- 
dition of modern industry. 

"Suppose," says H. Merivale, formerly Professor of Political 
Economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the English 
Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these 
crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the effort of getting rid 



634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, 
what would be the consequence? That, at the first returning de- 
mand for labour, there would be a deficiency. However rapid 
reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a gener- 
ation to replace the loss of adult labour. Now, the profits of our 
manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making use of the 
prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus compensat- 
ing themselves for the interval during which it is slack. This 
power is secured to them only by the command of machinery and 
of manual labour. They must have hands ready by them, they 
must be able to increase the activity of their operations when 
required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the 
market, or they cannot possibly maintain that pre-eminence in 
the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is 
founded." 1 Even Malthus recognises over-population as a neces- 
sity of modern industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he 
explains it by the absolute over-growth of the labouring pop- 
ulation, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. 
He says: "Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried 
to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country 
mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might 
injure it. . . . From the nature of a population, an increase 
of labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a 
particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years, and the 
conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place 
much more rapidly; a country is always liable to an increase in 
the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than 
the increase of population." 2 After Political Economy has thus 
demonstrated the constant production of a relative surplus-popu- 
lation of labourers to be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, 
she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of 
her "beau ideal" of a capitalist the following words addressed to 
those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own crea- 
tion of additional capital: — "We manufacturers do what we can 
for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on which you must 



1 H. Merivale: "Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies," 1841. Vol. 
I., p. 146. 

2 Malthus, "Principles of Political Economy/' pp. 215, 319, 320. In 
this work, Malthus finally discovers, with the help of Sismondi, the beauti- 
ful Trinity of capitalistic production: over-production, over-popula- 
tion, over-consumption — three very delicate monsters, indeed. Cf. F. 
Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," 1. c, p. 107, 
et seq. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 635 

subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your num- 
bers to the means of subsistence." 1 

Capitalist production can by no means content itself with 
the quantity of disposable labour-power which the natural in- 
crease of population yields. It requires for its free play an indus- 
trial reserve army independent of these natural limits. 

Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or 
diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the 
increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed. 

The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain 
the same, or even fall, while the variable capital increases. This 
is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and 
therefore his wages increase, and this although the price of labour 
remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of 
labour rises. Increase of variable capital, in this case, becomes 
an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. It 
is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity 
of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of 
labourers, if the cost is about the same. In the latter case, the 
outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the mass of 
labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. 
The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this 
motive. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital. 

We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of 
production and of the productive power of labour — at once the 
cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with 
the same outlay of variable capital, to set in action more labour 
by greater exploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individ- 
ual labour-power. We have further seen that the capitalist buys 
with the same capital a greater mass of labour-power, as he pro- 
gressively replaces skilled labourers by less skilled, mature labour- 
power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of 
young persons or children. 

On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumula- 
tion, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action without 
enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the 
same magnitude sets in action more labour with the same mass 
of labour-power; and finally, a greater number of inferior labour- 
powers by displacement of higher. 

The production of a relative surplus-population, or the set- 
ting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly than 



1 Harriet Martineau, "A Manchester Strike," 1832, p. 101. 



636 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the technical revolution of the process of production that accom- 
panies, and is accelerated by, the advance of accumulation; and 
more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable 
part of capital as compared with the constant. If the means of 
production, as they increase in extent and effective power, become 
to a less extent means of employment of labourers, this state of 
things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the pro- 
ductiveness of labour increases, capital increases its supply of 
labour more quickly than its demand for labourers. The over- 
work of the employed part of the working-class swells the ranks 
of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the 
latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to 
submit to over-work and to subjugation under the dictates of 
capital. The condemnation of one part of the working-class to 
enforced idleness by the over-work of the other part, and the con- 
verse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists, * 
and accelerates at the same time the production of the industrial 
reserve army on a scale corresponding with the advance of social 
accumulation. How important is this element in the formation of 
the relative surplus-population, is shown by the example of 



1 Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the oper- 
ative cotton-spinners of Blackburn, fierce denunciations of over-work, which, 
in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labour- 
ers. "The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 
13 hours per day, while there are hundreds who are compelled to be idle 
who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their fami- 
lies and save their brethren from a premature grave through being over- 
worked... We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of working over- 
time by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between mas- 
ters and servants. Those who are worked over-time feel the injustice equally 
with those who are condemned to forced idleness. There is in the district 
almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly dis- 
tributed. We are only asking what is right in requesting the masters 
generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better 
state of things begins to dawn upon us, rather than to work a por- 
tion of the hands over-time, while others, for want of work, are com- 
pelled to exist upon charity." ("Reports of Insp, of Fact., Oct. 31, 1863,'* 
p. 8.) The author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" grasps the 
effect of a relative surplus-population on the employed labourers with his 
usual unerring bourgeois instinct. "Another cause of idleness in this king- 
dom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands.... Whenever fiom 
an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labour- 
ers feel their own consequence, and will make their masters feel it like- 
wise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of these people, that 
in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by 
idling a whole day together." ("Essay, &amp;c," pp. 27, 28.) The fellows in fact 
were hankering after a rise in wages. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 637 

England. Her technical means for saving labour are colossal. 
Nevertheless, if to-morrow morning labour generally were re- 
duced to a rational amount, and proportioned to the different sec- 
tions of the working-class according to age and sex, the working 
population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying 
on of national production on its present scale. The great majority 
of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into 
"productive" ones. 

Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are 
exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the 
industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the pe- 
riodic changes, of the industrial cycle. They are, therefore, not 
determined by the variations of the absolute number of the work- 
ing population, but by the varying proportions in which the 
working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the 
increase or diminution in the relative amount of the surplus- 
population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set 
free. For Modern Industry with its decennial cycles and periodic 
phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are compli- 
cated by irregular oscillations following each other more and more 
quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which pretends 
to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation 
of the population, instead of regulating the demand and supply 
of labour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, 
the labour-market now appearing relatively under-full, because cap- 
ital is expanding, now again over-full, because it is contracting. 
Yet this is the dogma of the economists. According to them, wages 
rise in consequence of accumulation of capital. The higher wages 
stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, 
and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too full, and 
therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes 
insufficient. Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal. 
The working population is little by little decimated as the result 
of the fall in wages, so that capital is again in excess relatively 
to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the correspond- 
ing increase in the exploitation of the labourer again accelerates 
accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the 
increase of the working-class in check. Then comes again the 
time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand, wages 
rise, and so on. A beautiful mode of motion this for developed 
capitalist production! Before, in consequence of the rise of wages, 
any positive increase of the population really fit for work could 
occur, the time would have been passed again and again, during 



638 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

which the industrial campaign must have been carried through, 
the battle fought and won. 

Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignifi- 
cant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took place in 
the English agricultural districts. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly 
wages rose from 7s. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from 7s. or 8s., to 9s., 
&amp;c. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural 
surplus-population caused by the demands of war, the vast exten- 
sion of railroads, factories, mines, &amp;c. The lower the wages, the 
higher is the proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them 
expresses itself. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. and it rises to 
22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent.; but if it is only 7s. and it rises 

to 9s., that is a rise of 28YP er cent., which sounds very fine. 

Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Econo- 
mist, with reference to these starvation-wages, prattled quite 
seriously of "a general and substantial advance." 1 What did the 
farmers do now? Did they wait until, in consequence of this bril- 
liant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased 
and multiplied that their wages must fall again, as prescribed by 
the dogmatic economic brain? They introduced more machinery, 
and in a moment the labourers were redundant again in a propor- 
tion satisfactory even to the farmers. There was now "more capi- 
tal" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive 
form. With this the demand for labour fell, not only relatively, 
but absolutely. 

The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate 
the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the working- 
class — i.e., the total labour-power — and the total social capi- 
tal, with the laws that distribute the working population over 
the different spheres of production. If, e.g., in consequence of fa- 
vourable circumstances, accumulation in a particular sphere of 
production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being 
greater than the average profits, attract additional capital, of 
course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. The higher 
wages draw a larger part of the working population into the more 
favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour-power, and wages 
at length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pres- 
sure is too great. Then, not only does the immigration of labourers 
into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to 
their emigration. Here the political economist thinks he sees the 



1 Economist, Jan. 21, 1860. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 639 

why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompa- 
nying an increase of wages, and of a diminution of wages accompa- 
nying an absolute increase of labourers. But he sees really only 
the local oscillation of the labour-market in a particular sphere 
of production— he sees only the phenomena accompanying the 
distribution of the working population into the different spheres 
of outlay of capital, according to its varying needs. 

The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation 
and average prosperity, weighs down the active labour-army; 
during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds 
its pretensions in check. Relative surplus-population is therefore 
the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour 
works. It confines the field of action of this law within the limits 
absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the 
domination of. capital. 

This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of eco- 
nomic apologetics. It will be remembered that if through the intro- 
duction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of 
variable capital is transformed into constant, the economic apolo- 
gist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that 
very act sets labourers "free," in exactly the opposite way, pretend- 
ing that it sets free capital for the labourers. Only now can one 
fully understand the effrontery of these apologists. What are set 
free are not only the labourers immediately turned out by the 
machines, but also their future substitutes in the rising genera- 
tion, and the additional contingent, that with the usual exten- 
sion of trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. They 
are now all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking out for 
employment can dispose of them. Whether it attracts them or 
others, the effect on the general labour demand will be nil, if 
this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many la- 
bourers as the machines threw upon it. If it employs a smaller 
number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a 
greater, the general demand for labour only increases to the extent 
of the excess of the employed over those "set free." The impulse 
that additional capital, seeking an outlet, would otherwise have 
given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case 
neutralised to the extent of the labourers thrown out of employ- 
ment by the machine. That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic 
production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capi- 
tal is accompanied by no corresponding rise in the general demand 
for labour. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the 
misery, the sufferings, the possible death of the displaced labourers 



640 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

during the transition period that banishes them into the indus- 
trial reserve army! The demand for labour is not identical with 
increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the work- 
ing-class. It is not a case of two independent forces working on 
one another. Les des sont pipes. Capital works on both sides at 
the same time. If its accumulation, on the one hand, increases 
the demand for labour, it increases on the other the supply of 
labourers by the "setting free" of them, whilst at the same time 
the pressure of the unemployed compels those that are employed 
to furnish more labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, 
to a certain extent, independent of the supply of labourers. The 
action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis 
completes the despotism of capital. As soon, therefore, as the 
labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the same 
measure as they work more, as they produce more wealth for 
others, and as the productive power of their labour increases, so 
in the same measure even their function as a means of the self- 
expansion of capital becomes more and more precarious for them; 
as soon as they discover that the degree of intensity of the compe- 
tition among themselves depends wholly on the pressure of the 
relative surplus-population; as soon as, by Trades' Unions, &amp;c, 
they try to organise a regular co-operation between employed and 
unemployed in order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous effects 
of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class, so 
soon capital and its sycophant, Political Economy, cry out at the 
infringement of the "eternal" and so to say "sacred" law of supply 
and demand. Every combination of employed and unemployed 
disturbs the "harmonious" action of this law. But, on the other 
hand, as soon as (in the colonies, e.g.) adverse circumstances pre- 
vent the creation of an industrial reserve army and, with it, the 
absolute dependence of the working-class upon the capitalist 
class, capital, along with its commonplace Sancho Panza, rebels 
against the "sacred" law of supply and demand, and tries to check 
its inconvenient action by forcible means and State interference. 

SECTION 4.— DIFFERENT FORMS OF 

THE RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION. 

THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALISTIC ACCUMULATION 

The relative surplus-population exists in every possible form. 
Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is only 
partially employed or wholly unemployed. Not taking into account 
the great periodically recurring forms that the changing phases 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 641 

of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute form during 
the crisis, then again a chronic form during dull times — it has 
always three forms, the floating, the latent, the stagnant. 

In the centres of modern industry— factories, manufactures, 
ironworks, mines, &amp;c. — the labourers are sometimes repelled, 
sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those 
employed increasing on the whole, although in a constantly de- 
creasing proportion to the scale of production. Here the surplus- 
population exists in the floating form. 

In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, where 
machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern division 
of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are employed up 
to the age of maturity. When this term is once reached, only a very 
small number continue to find employment in the same branches 
of industry, whilst the majority are regularly discharged. This ma- 
jority forms an element of the floating surplus-population, growing 
with the extension of those branches of industry. Part of them emi- 
grates, following in fact capital that has emigrated. One conse- 
quence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the 
male, teste England. That the natural increase of the number of 
labourers does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation 
of capital, and yet all the time is in excess of them, is a contradic- 
tion inherent to the movement of capital itself. It wants larger 
numbers of youthful labourers, a smaller number of adults. The 
contradiction is not more glaring than that other one that there 
is a complaint of the want of hands, while at the same time many 
thousands are out of work, because the division of labour chains 
them to a particular branch of industry. 1 

The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so 
rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has already 
more or less completely lived himself out. He falls into the ranks- 
of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down from a higher to a lower 
step in the scale. It is precisely among the workpeople of modern 
industry that we meet with the shortest duration of life. Dr. Lee, 
Medical Officer of Health for Manchester, stated "that the average 
age at death of the Manchester . . . upper middle class was 
38 years, while the average age at death of the labouring class 



1 Whilst during the last six months of 1866, 80-90,000 working peo- 
ple in London were thrown out of work, the Factory Report for that same 
half year says: "It does not appear absolutely true to say that demand will 
always produce supply just at the moment when it is needed. It has not 
done so with labour, for much machinery has been idle last year for want 
of hands." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 81.) 



$42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

was 17; while at Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 
against 15. It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease 
of life which was more than double the value of that which fell to 
the lot of the less favoured citizens." x In order to conform to these 
circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the prole- 
tariat must take place under conditions that shall swell their 
numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly. 
Hence, rapid renewal of the generations of labourers (this law does 
not hold for the other classes of the population). This social need 
is met by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the condi- 
tions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by 
the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their pro- 
duction. 

As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agri- 
culture, and in proportion to the extent to which it does so, the 
demand for an agricultural labouring population falls absolutely, 
while the accumulation of the capital employed in agriculture 
advances, without this repulsion being, as in non-agricultural 
industries, compensated by a greater attraction. Part of the agri- 
cultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing 
over into an urban or manufacturing proletariat, and on the 
look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation. 
(Manufacture is used here in the sense of all non-agricultural 
industries.) 2 This source of relative surplus-population is thus 
constantly flowing. But the constant flow towards the towns pre- 
supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent surplus-popula- 
tion, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels 
of outlet open to exceptional width. The agricultural labourer is 
therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands 
with one foot already in the swamp of pauperism. 



1 Opening address to the Sanitary Conference, Birmingham, January 
15th, 1875, by J. Chamberlain, Mayor of the town, now (1883) President of 
the Board of Trade. 

2 781 towns given in the census for 1861 for England and Wales "con- 
tained 10,960,998 inhabitants, while the villages and country parishes con- 
tained 9,105,226. In 1851, 580 towns were distinguished, and the popula- 
tion in them and in the surrounding country was nearly equal. But while 
in the subsequent ten years the population in the villages and the country 
increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns increased by a mil- 
lion and a half (1,554,067). The increase of the population of the country 
parishes is 6.5 per cent., and of the towns 17.3 per cent. The difference in 
the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. Three- 
fourths of the total increase of population has taken place in the towns." 
("Census, &amp;c," pp, 11 and 12.) 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 643 

The third category of the relative surplus-population, the 
stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with ex- 
tremely irregular employment. Hence it furnishes to capital an 
inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power. Its condi- 
tions of life sink below the average normal level of the working- 
class; this makes it at once the broad basis of special branches of 
capitalist exploitation. It is characterised by maximum of 
working-time, and minimum of wages. We have learnt to know its 
chief form under the rubric of "domestic industry." It recruits 
itself constantly from the supernumerary forces of modern indus- 
try and agriculture, and specially from those decaying branches 
of industry where handicraft is yielding to manufacture, manu- 
facture to machinery. Its extent grows, as with the extent and 
energy of accumulation, the creation of a surplus-population ad- 
vances. But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and self- 
perpetuating element of the working-class, taking a proportionally 
greater part in the general increase of that class than the other 
elements. In fact, not only the number of births and deaths, but 
the absolute size of the families stand in inverse proportion to the 
height of wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsist- 
ence of which the different categories of labourers dispose. This 
law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even 
civilised colonists. It calls to mind the boundless reproduc- 
tion of animals individually weak and constantly hunted 
down. x 

The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population finally 
dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Exclusive of vagabonds, crim- 
inals, prostitutes, in a word, the "dangerous" classes, this 
layer of society consists of three categories. First, those able to 
work. One need only glance superficially at the statistics of Eng- 
lish pauperism to find that the quantity of paupers increases 
with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade. Sec- 
ond, orphans and pauper children. These are candidates for the 
industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 
1860, e.g., speedily and in large numbers enrolled in the active 



1 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. Smith.) This is even 
a specially wise arrangement of God, according to the gallant and witty Abbe 
Galiani. "Iddio af che gli uomini che esercitano inestieri di prima utilita 
nascono abbondantemente." (Galiani, 1. c, p. 78.) "Misery up to the extreme 
point of famine and pestilence, instead of checking, tends to increase popu- 
lation." (S. Laing, "National Distress," 1844, p. 69.) After Laing has illus- 
trated this by statistics, he continues: "If the people were all in easy cir- 
cumstances, the world would soon be depopulated." 



644 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

army of labourers. Third, the demoralised and ragged, and those 
unable to work, chiefly people who succumb to their incapacity for 
adaptation, due to the division of labour; people who have passed 
the normal age of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose num- 
ber increases with the increase of dangerous machinery, of mines, 
chemical works, &amp;c, the mutilated, the sickly, the widows, 
&amp;c. Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the 
dead weight of the industrial reserve army. Its production is in- 
cluded in that of the relative surplus-population, its necessity in 
theirs; along with the surplus-population, pauperism forms a con- 
dition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development 
of wealth. It enters into the faux frais of capitalist production; 
but capital knows how to throw these, for the most part, from 
its own shoulders on to those of the working-class and the lower 
middle class. 

The greater the social wealth, the functioning capital, the 
extent and energy of its growth, and, therefore, also the absolute 
mass of the proletariat and the productiveness of its labour, the 
greater is the industrial reserve army. The same causes which 
develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour- 
power at its disposal. The relative mass of the industrial reserve 
army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth. But 
the greater this reserve army in proportion to the active labour- 
army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus-popula- 
tion, whose misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour. 
The more extensive, finally, the lazarus-layers of the working- 
class, and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official 
pauperism. This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumu- 
lation. Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many 
circumstances, the analysis of which does not concern us here. 

The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches 
to the labourers the accommodation of their number to the 
requirements of capital. The mechanism of capitalist production 
and accumulation constantly effects this adjustment. The first 
word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus-popu- 
lation, or industrial reserve army. Its last word is the misery of 
constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the 
dead weight of pauperism. 

The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means 
of production, thanks to the advance in the productiveness of 
social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively di- 
minishing expenditure of human power, this law, in a capitalist 
society— where the labourer does not employ the means of pro- 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 645 

duction, but the means of production employ the labourer — 
undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus: the higher 
the productiveness of labour, the greater is the pressure of the 
labourers on the means of employment, the more precarious, there- 
fore, becomes their condition of existence, viz., the sale of their 
own labour-power for the increasing of another's wealth, or for 
the self-expansion of capital. The fact that the means of produc- 
tion, and the productiveness of labour, increase more rapidly 
than the productive population, expresses itself, therefore, 
capitalistically in the inverse form that the labouring population 
always increases more rapidly than the conditions under 
which capital can employ this increase for its own self-expan- 
sion. 

We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of 
relative surplus-value: within the capitalist system all methods 
for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about 
at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for the develop- 
ment of production transform themselves into means of domi- 
nation over, and exploitation of, the producers; they mutilate 
the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level 
of an appendage of a machine, destroy every remnant of charm 
in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him 
the intellectual potentialities of the labour-process in the same 
proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent pow- 
er; they distort the conditions under which he works, subject 
him during the labour-process to a despotism the more hateful 
for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, 
and drag his wife and child beneath the wheels of the Juggernaut 
of capital. But all methods for the production of surplus-value are 
at the same time methods of accumulation; and every extension 
of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of 
those methods. It follows therefore that in proportion as capital 
accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or 
low, must grow worse. The law, finally, that always equilibrates 
the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to 
the extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the labour- 
er to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did Prometheus 
to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corre- 
sponding with accumulation of capital. Accumulation of wealth at 
one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, 
agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, 
at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that produces 
its own product in the form of capital. 



646 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

This antagonistic character of capitalistic accumulation 1 
is enunciated in various forms by political economists, although 
by them it is confounded with phenomena, certainly to some 
extent analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and be- 
longing to precapitalistic modes of production. 

The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers 
of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist produc- 
tion as a general natural law of social wealth. "In the economy of 
a nation, advantages and evils always balance one another (il 
bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre all, istessa mi- 
sura): the abundance of wealth with some people, is always equal 
to the want of it with others (la copia dei beni in alcuni sempre 
eguale alia mancanza di essi in altri): the great riches of a small 
number are always accompanied by the absolute privation of 
the first necessaries of life for many others. The wealth of a na- 
tion corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds 
with its wealth. Diligence in some compels idleness in others. 
The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the rich and 
active," &amp;c. 2 In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after 
Ortes, the Church of England parson, Townsend, glorified misery as 
a necessary condition of wealth. "Legal constraint (to labour) is 
attended with too much trouble, violence, and noise, .... 
whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted pres- 
sure, but as the most natural motive to industry and labour, it 
calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything therefore 
depends upon making hunger permanent among the working- 
class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of popu- 
lation, especially active among the poor, provides. "It seems to 
be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree im- 
provident" [i.e., so improvident as to be born without a silver 
spoon in the mouthj, "that there may always be some to fulfil 



1 "De jour en jour il devient done plus clair que les rapports de pro- 
duction dans lesquels se meut la bourgeoisie n'ont pas un caractere un, un 
caractere simple, mais un caractere de duplicite; que dans les memes rap- 
ports dans lesquels se produit la richesse, la misere se produit aussi; que 
dans les memes rapports dans lesquels il y a developpement des forces produc- 
tives, il y a une force productive de repression; que ces rapports ne pro- 
duisent la richesse bourgeoise, e'est-a-dire la richesse de la classe bourgeoise, 
qu'en aneantissant continuellement la richesse des membres integrants de 
cette classe et en produisant un proletariat toujours croissant." (Karl Marx: 
"Misere de la Philosophie," p. 116.) 

2 G. Ortes: "Delia Economia Nazionale libri sei,* 1777," in Custodi, 
Parte Moderna, t. xxi, pp. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc. Ortes says, 1 c, p. 32: "In luo- 
codi progettar sistemi inutili per la lelicita de'popoli, mi limitero a inves- 
tigare la ragione della loro infelicita." 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 647 

the most servile, the most sordid, and the most ignoble offices in 
the community. The stock of human happiness is thereby much 
increased, whilst the more delicate are not only relieved from drudg- 
ery. . . . but are left at liberty without interruption to pursue 
those callings which are suited to their various dispositions. . . . 
it [the Poor Law] tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the 
symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature have 
established in the world." x If the Venetian monk found in the fatal 
destiny that makes misery eternal, the raison d'etre of Christian 
charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the Protestant 
prebendary finds in it a pretext for condemning the laws in virtue 
of which the poor possessed a right to a miserable public relief. 

"The progress of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this 
useful class of society . . . which performs the most wearisome, 
the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in a word, 
on its shoulders all that is disagreeable and servile in life, and pro- 
cures thus for other classes leisure, serenity of mind and conven- 
tional [c'est bon!] dignity of character." 2 Storch asks himself in 
what then really consist the progress of this capitalistic civili- 
sation with its misery and its degradation of the masses, as com- 
pared with barbarism. He finds but one answer: security! 

"Thanks to the advance of industry and science," says 
Sismondi, "every labourer can produce every day much more 
than his consumption requires. But at the same time, whilst his 
labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he called on to 
consume it himself, make him less fit for labour." According to him, 
"men" [i.e., non-workers] "would probably prefer to do without 
all artistic perfection, and all the enjoyments that manufacturers 
procure for us, if it were necessary that all should buy them by 
constant toil like that of the labourer. . . . Exertion to-day is 



1 "A Dissertation on the Poor Laws. By a Well-wisher of Mankind. 
(The Rev. J. Townsend) 1786," republished Lond. 1817, pp. 15, 39, 41. This 
"delicate" parson, from whose work just quoted, as well as from his "Jour- 
ney through Spain," Malthus often copies whole pages, himself borrowed 
the greater part of his doctrine from Sir James Steuart, whom he however al- 
ters in the borrowing. E.g., when Steuart says: "Here, in slavery, was a 
forcible method of making mankind diligent," [for the non-workers] ... "Men 
were then forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for others], "because they were 
slaves of others; men are now forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for non- 
workers] "because they are the slaves of their necessities," he does not thence 
conclude, like the fat holder of benefices, that the wage-labourer must 
always go fasting. He wishes, on the contrary, to increase their wants and to 
make the increasing number of their wants a stimulus to their labour for the 
"more delicate." 

■ Storch, 1. c, t. iii., p. 223. 



648 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

separated from its recompense; it is not the same man that first 
works, and then reposes; but it is because the one works that the 
other rests. . . . The indefinite multiplication of the productive 
powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of 
luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich." 1 

Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois doctri- 
naire, blurts out brutally: "In poor nations the people are comfor- 
table, in rich nations they are generally poor." 2 

SECTION 5. _ ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW 
OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 

(a.) England from 1846-1866 

No period of modern society is so favourable for the study 
of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years. It 
is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. But of all coun- 
tries England again furnishes the classical example, because 
it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capital- 
ist production is here alone completely developed, and lastly, 
because the introduction of the Free-trade millennium since 1846 
has cutoff the last retreat of vulgar economy. The titanic advance 
of production— the latter half of the 20 years' period again far 
surpassing the former— has been already pointed out sufficiently 
in Part IV. 

Although the absolute increase of the English population in 
the last half century was very great, the relative increase or rate 
of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from 
the census shows. 

Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and 
Wales in decimal numbers: 

1811-1821 1.533 per cent. 

1821-1831 1.446 „ 

1831-1841 1.326 „ 

1841-1851 1.216 „ 

1851-1861 1.141 „ 

Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of 
wealth. Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &amp;c, that come 



1 Sismondi, 1. c, pp. 79, 80, 85. 

2 Destutt de Tracy, 1. c, p. 231: "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le 
peuple est a son aise; et les nations riches, c'est la ou il est ordinairoment 
pauvre." 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 649 

under the income tax, furnishes the surest basis. The increase of 
profits liable to income tax (farmers and some other categories not 
included) in Great Britain from 1853 to 1864 amounted to 50.47% 
or 4.58% as the annual average, 1 that of the population during 
the same period to about 12%. The augmentation of the rent of 
land subject to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, 

fisheries, &amp;c), amounted for 1853 to 1864 to 38% or 3-^ % annu- 
ally. Under this head the following categories show the greatest 
increase: 



of 1864 


over 


that 


increase 


of 


1853 




per year 


Houses, 




38.60% 


3.50% 


Quarries, 




84.76o/ 


7.70% 


Mines, 




68.85% 


6.26% 


Ironworks, 




39.92% 


3.63% 


Fisheries, 




57.37% 


5.21% 


Gasworks, 




125.02% 


H.45% 


Railways, 




83.29% 


7.57%* 



If we compare the years from 1853 to 1864 in three sets of 
four consecutive years each, the rate of augmentation of the in- 
come increases constantly. It is, e.g., for that arising from prof- 
its between 1853 to 1857, 1.73% yearly; 1857-1861, 2.74%, and 
for 1861-64, 9.30% yearly. The sum of the incomes of the United 
Kingdom that come under the income tax wasin 1856, £307, 068, 898; 
in 1859, £328,127,416; in 1862, £351,745,241; in 1863, 
£359,142,897; in 1864, £362,462,279; in 1865, £385,530,020. 3 

The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time 
by its concentration and centralisation. Although no official 
statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), 
they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. These statistics gave 



1 "Tenth Report of the Commissioners of H. M. Inland Revenue." Lond. 
1866, p. 38. 

2 Ibidem. 

8 These figures are sufficient for comparison, but, taken absolutely, 
are false, since perhaps, £100,000,000 of income are annually not declared. 
The complaints of the Inland Revenue Commissioners of systematic fraud, 
especially ou the part of the commercial and industrial classes, are repeat- 
ed in each of their reports. So e.g., "A Joint-stock company returns £6,000 as 
assessable profits, the surveyor raises the amount to £88,000, and upon that 
sum duty is ultimately paid. Another company which returns £190,000 i9 
finally compelled to admit that the true return should be £250,000." (Ibid., 
p 42.) 



650 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of less than 
100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to 26,597, so that 5,016 had been 
thrown together into larger farms. 1 From 1815 to 1825 no person- 
al estate of more than £1,000,000 came under the succession duty; 
from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did; and 4 from 1856 to June, 1859, 

i.e., in 4 — years. 2 The centralisation will, however, be best seen 

from a short analysis of the Income Tax Schedule D (profits, 
exclusive of farms, &amp;c), in the years 1864 and 1865. I note before- 
hand that incomes from this source pay income tax on every- 
thing over £60. These incomes liable to taxation in England, 
Wales and Scotland, amounted in 1864 to £95,844,222, in 1865 to 
£105,435, 5'79. 3 The number of persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416, 
out of a population of 23,891,009; in 1865, 332,431 out of a popu- 
lation of 24,127,003. The following table shows the distribution 
of these incomes in the two years: 





Year ending April 5th, 1864. 


Year ending April 5th, 1865. 


Income from 
profits. 


Persons. 


Income from 
profits. 


Persons. 


Total Income . . . 

of these .... 
»&gt; » 

» »&gt; 

&gt;» » 


£95,844,222 

57,028,289 

36,415,225 

22,809,781 

8,744,762 


308,416 

23,334 

3,619 

832 

91 


105,435,738 
64,554,297 
42,535,576 
27,555,313 
11,077,238 


332,431 

24,265 

4,021 

973 

107 



In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 
61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,113,167; in 1864, 92,787,873 
tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons of pig-iron, 
of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951 tons, of value £11,919,877. 
In 1854 the length of the railroads worked in the United King- 
dom was 8,054 miles, with a paid-up capital of £286,068,794; in 
1864 the length was 12,789 miles, with capital paid up of 
£425,719,613. In 1854 the total sum of the exports and imports 
of the United Kingdom was £268,210,145; in 1865, £489,923,285. 
The following table shows the movement of the exports: 



1 "Census, &amp;.c," 1. c, p. 29. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords 
own half of England, and 12 half the Scotch soil, has never been refuted. 

2 "Fourth Report, &amp;c, of Inland Revenue." Lond., 1860, p. 17 

8 These are the net incomes after certain legally authorised abatements. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 651 



1846 £58,842,377 

1849 63,596,052 

1856 115,826,948 

1860 135,842,817 

1865 165,862,402 

1866 188,917, 563* 



After these few examples one understands the cry of triumph 
of the Registrar-General of the British people: "Rapidly as the 
population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress 
of industry and wealth." 2 

Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the pro- 
ducers of this wealth, to the working-class. "It is one of the most 
melancholy features in the social state of this country," says Glad- 
stone, "that while there was a decrease in the consuming powers of 
the people, and while there was an increase in the privations and 
distress of the labouring class and operatives, there was at the same 
time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, and 
a constant increase of capital." 8 Thus spake this unctuous min- 
ister in the House of Commons of February 13th, 1843. On April 
16th, 1863, 20 years later, in the speech in which he introduced his 
Budget: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable income of the country 
increased by 6 per cent. ... In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 
it had increased from the basis taken in 1853 by 20 per cent.! 
The fact is so astonishing as to be almost incredible. . . . 
this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power . . . 
entirely confined to classes of property .... must be of indi- 
rect benefit to the labouring population, because it cheapens 
commodities of general consumption. While the rich have been 
growing richer, the poor have been growing less poor. At any 



1 At this moment, March, 1867, the Indian and Chinese market is again 
overstocked by the consignments of the British cotton manufacturers. In 
1866 a reduction in wages of 5 per cent, took place amongst the cotton opera- 
tives. In 1867, as consequence of a similar operation, there was a strike of 
20,000 men at Preston. [Added in the 4th German edition. — That was the 
prelude to the crisis which broke out immediately afterwards. — F. E.] 

2 "Census, &amp;c," 1. c, p. 11. 

3 Gladstone in the House of Commons, Feb 13th, 1843. Times, Feb. 
14th, 1843— "It is one of the most melancholy features in the social state 
of this country that we see, beyond the possibility of denial, that while 
there is at this moment a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, an 
increase of the pressure of privations and distress; there is at the same 
time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, an increase 
of the luxuriousness of their habits, and of their means of enjoyment.** 
(Hansard, 13th Feb.) 



652 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume 
to say" 1 How lame an anti-climax! If the working-class has re- 
mained "poor," only "less poor" in proportion as it produces for 
the wealthy class "an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and 
power," then it has remained relatively just as poor. If the ex- 
tremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because 
the extremes of wealth have. As to the cheapening of the means 
of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., the accounts of the Lon- 
don Orphan Asylum, show an increase in price of 20% for the 
average of the three years 1860-1862, compared with 1851-1853. 
In the following three years, 1863-1865, there was a progressive 
rise in the price of meat, butter, milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a 
number of other necessary means of subsistence. 2 Gladstone's 
next Budget speech of April 7th, 1864, is a Pindaric dithyrambus 
on the advance of surplus-value-making and the happiness of the 
people "tempered by poverty." He speaks of masses "on the bor- 
der" of pauperism, of branches of trade in which "wages have 
not increased," and finally sums up the happiness of the working- 
class in the words: "human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a 
struggle for existence."* Professor Fawcett, not bound like 
Gladstone by official considerations, declares roundly: "I do not, 
of course, deny that money wages have been augmented by this 
increase of capital (in the last ten years), but this apparent advan- 
tage is to a great extent lost, because many of the necessaries of 
life are becoming dearer" (he believes because of the fall in value 
of the precious metals). . . . "the rich grow rapidly richer, 
whilst there is no perceptible advance in the comfort enjoyed by 



1 Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. Morning 
Star, April 17th. 

2 See the official accounts in the Blue book: "Miscellaneous Statistics 
of the United Kingdom," Part vi"., London, 1866, pp. 260-273, passim. 
Instead of the statistics of orphan asylums, &amp;c, the declamations of the min- 
isterial journals in recommending dowries for the Royal children might 
also serve. The greater dearness of the means of subsistence is never forgot- 
ten there. 

3 Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. — "The Hansard 
version runs: 'Again, and yet more at large — what is human life, but, in 
the majority of cases, a struggle for existence.* The continual crying con- 
tradictions in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864 were char- 
acterised by an English writer by the following quotation from Boileau: 

"Voila I'homme en effet. II va du blanc au noir, 
II condamne au matin ses sentiments du soir. 
Importun a tout autre, a soi-meme incommode, 
II change a tout moment d 'esprit comme de mode." 
("The Theory of Exchanges, &amp;c," London, 1864, p. 135.) 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 653 

the industrial classes .... They (the labourers) become 
almost the slaves of the tradesman, to whom they owe 
money." 1 

In thy chapters on the "working-day" and "machinery," the 
reader has seen under what circumstances the British working- 
class created an "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power" 
for the propertied classes. There we were chiefly concerned with 
the social functioning of the labourer. But for a full elucidation 
of the law of accumulation, his condition outside the workshop 
must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling. The 
limits of this book compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the 
worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agri- 
cultural labourers, who together form the majority of the woik- 
ing-class. 

But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of 
the working-class which has forfeited its condition of existence 
(the sale of labour-power), and vegetates upon public alms. The 
official list of paupers numbered in England 2 851,369 persons; 
in 1856, 877,767; in 1865, 971,433. In consequence of the cotton 
famine, it grew in the years 1863 and 1864 to 1",079,382 and 
1,014,978. The crisis of 1866, which fell most heavily on London, 
created in this centre of the world-market, more populous than 
the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism for the year 
1866 of 19.5% compared with 1865, and of 24.4% compared with 
1864, and a still greater increase for the first months of 1867 as 
compared with 1866. From the analysis of the statistics of pauper- 
ism, two points are to be taken. On the one hand, the fluctuation 
up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic 
changes of the industrial cycle. On the other, the official statistics 
become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of pau- 
perism in proportion as, with the accumulation of capital, the 
class-struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the 
working-men, develop. E.g., the barbarity in the treatment 
of the paupers, at which the English Press (The Times, Pall Mall 
Gazette, etc.) have cried out so loudly during the last two years, 
is of ancient date. F. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same 
horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of "sensational 
literature." But frightful increase of "deaths by starvation" in 



1 H. Fawcett, I. c, pp. 67-82. As to the increasing dependence ol la- 
bourers on the retail shopkeepers, this is the consequence of the frequent 
oscillations and interruptions of their employment. 

2 Wales here is always included in England. 



£54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the grow- 
ing horror in which the working-people hold the slavery of the 
workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. 1 

(t&gt;.) The Badly Paid Strata 
of the British Industrial Class 

During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged 
by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of 
nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Che- 
shire. His observations during many preceding years had led him 
to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases," the daily 
food of an average woman ought to contain at least 3,900 grains 
of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen; the daily food of an average 
man, at least 4,300 grains of carbon with 200 grains of nitrogen; 
for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are 

contained in 2 lbs. of good wheaten bread, for men — more; for 

y 

the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 
grains of carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. His calculation 
was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agree- 
ment with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want 
had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives. This 
was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains 
of nitrogen weekly. 

In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into 
the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the English 
working-class. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, 
chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr. Smith. His inquiry 
ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the 
other, over silk-weavers, needle-women, kid-glovers, stocking- 
weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers. The latter categories 
are, with the exception of the stocking-weavers, exclusively town- 
dwellers. It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each cate- 
gory the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the 
best circumstances. 

As a general result it was found that "in only one of the ex- 
amined classes of in-door operatives did the average nitrogen- 



1 A peculiar light is thrown on the advance made since the time of 
Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word "workhouse" is still occasion- 
ally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e.g., the opening of his chap- 
ter on the division of labour; "those employed in every different branch of 
the work can often be collected into the same workhouse." 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 



655 



supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the esti- 
mated standard of bare sufficiency [i.e., sufficient to avert star- 
vation diseases], and that in two classes there was defect — in 
one, a very large defect — of both nitrogen and carbon. Moreover, 
as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, 
it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than the esti- 
mated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third 
were withless than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, 
and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somer- 
setshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local 
diet." 1 Among the agricultural labourers, those of England, 
the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed. 2 
The insufficiency of food among the agricultural labourers, fell, 
as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must 
eat to do his work." Still greater penury ravaged the town-workers 
examined. "They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there 
must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." 3 ("Pri- 
vation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence" from paying 
for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere 
vegetation of his "hands.") 

The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of 
the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling workpeople, 
as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with 
the food-allowance of the cotton operatives during the time of 
their greatest distress: 



Both ^exes 



Average weekly 
carbon 



Average weekly 
nitrogen 



Five in-door occupations 
Unemployed Lancashire 

Operatives 

Minimum quantity to be 
allowed to the* Lanca- 
shire Operatives, equal 
number oi' males and fe- 
males 



28,87b grains 
28,211 " 



28,600 



1,192 grains 
1,295 " 



1,330 



1 "Public Health. Sixth Report, 1864," p. 13. 

2 1. c, p. 17. 

3 I. c, p. 13. 

4 I. c, Appendix, p. 232. 



656 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

One half, or -p^ of the industrial labour categories investi- 

gated, had absolutely no beer, 28% no milk. The weekly average 
of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from 

3 
seven ounces in the needle-women to 24-r- ounces in the stocking- 
makers. The majority of those who did not obtain milk were 
needle-women in London. The quantity of bread-stuffs consumed 

3 1 

weekly varied from 7-r- lbs. for the needle- women to lly lbs. for the 

shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9.9 lbs, per adult weekly. 
Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces weekly for the kid- 
glovers to 11 ounces for the stocking-makers; and the total average 
per week for all categories was 8 ounces per adult weekly. Total 
weekly average of butter (fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The weekly 

average of meat (bacon, etc.) varied from 1-r ounces for the silk- 

weavers, to I8-7- ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the 
different categories 13.6 ounces. The weekly cost of food per 
adult, gave the following average figures; silk-weavers 2s. 2yd., 

1 3 

needle-women 2s. 7d., kid-glovers 2s. 9— d., shoemakers 2s. 7— d., 

stocking-weavers 2s. 6^7- d. For the si Ik- weavers of Macclesfield 

the average was only Is. 8y d. The worst categories were the needle- 
women, silk-weavers and kid-glovers. * Of these facts, Dr. Simon 
in his General Health Report says: 'That cases are innumerable 
in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, 
can be affirmed by any one who is conversant with poor law medi- 
cal practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospi- 
tals. . . . Yet in this point of view, there is, in my opinion, 
a very important sanitary context to be added. It must be remem- 
bered that privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that as 
a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations 
have preceded it. Long before insufficiency of diet is a matter of 
hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think of 
counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene be- 
tween life and starvation, the household will have been utterly 
destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been 
even scantier than food— against inclemencies of weather there 



1 1. c, pp. 232, 233. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 657 

will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have 
been stinted to the degree in which over-crowding produces or 
increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will 
have been scarcely any — even cleanliness will have been found 
costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours 
to maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional 
pangs of hunger. The home, too, will be where shelter can be cheap- 
est bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of 
sanitary supervision, least drainage, least scavenging, least sup- 
pression of public nuisances, least or worst water supply, and, 
if in town, least light and air. Such are the sanitary dangers to 
which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty 
enough to imply scantiness of food. And while the sum of them is 
of terrible magnitude against life, the mere scantiness of food is 

in itself of very serious moment These are painful 

reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to 
which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness. In all 
cases it is the poverty of working populations. Indeed, as regards 
the indoor operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pit- 
tance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged. Yet 
evidently it is only in a qualified sense that the work can be 

deemed self-supporting And on a very large scale the 

nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to 
pauperism." l 

The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the 
most industrious layers of the working-class, and the extravagant 
consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist 
accumulation is the basis, reveals itself only when the economic 
laws are known. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor." 
Every unprejudiced observer sees that the greater the central- 
isation of the means of production, the greater is the correspond- 
ing heaping together of the labourers, within a given space; 
that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumulation, the more 
miserable are the dwellings of the working-people. "Improvements" 
of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition 
of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, ware- 
houses, &amp;c, the widening of streets for business traffic, for the 
carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &amp;c, 
drive away the poor into even worse and more crowded hiding 
places. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of 
dwellings is in inverse ratio to their excellence, and that the mines 



1 1. c, pp. 14, 15. 



658 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of misery are exploited by house speculators with more profit 
or less cost than ever were the mines of Potosi. The antagonistic 
character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capital- 
istic relations of property generally, x is here so evident, that even 
the official English reports on this subject teem with heterodox 
onslaughts on "property and its rights." With the development 
of industry, with the accumulation of capital, with the growth 
and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that 
the mere fear of contagious diseases which do not spare even 
"respectability," brought into existence from 1847 to 1864 no 
less than 10 Acts of Parliament on sanitation, and that the fright- 
ened bourgeois in some towns, as Liverpool, Glasgow, &amp;c, 
took strenuous measures through their municipalities. Neverthe- 
less Dr. Simon, in his report of 1865, says: "Speaking generally, 
it may be said that the evils are uncontrolled in England." By 
order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the 
conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 
of the poorer classes in the towns. The results of the admirable 
work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) 
and eighth (1866) reports on "Public Health." To the agricultural 
labourers, I shall come later. On the condition of town dwellings, 
I quote, as preliminary, a general remark of Dr. Simon. "Although 
my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, 
common humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil 
should not be ignored .... In its higher degrees it [i.e., 
over-crowding] almost necessarily involves such negation of all 
delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily functions, 
such exposure of animal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bes- 
tial than human. To be subject to these influences is a degrada- 
tion which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it 
continues to work. To children who are born under its curse, it 
must often be a very baptism into infamy. And beyond all measure 
hopeless is the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever 
in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which 
has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." 2 

London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, 
absolutely unfit for human beings. "He feels clear," says Dr. 



1 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and 
shamefully sacrificed to the rights of proper ty as in regard to the lodging of 
the labouring class. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of 
human sacrifice, a shrine where thousands pass yearly' through the fire as 
offerings to the moloch of avarice." S. Laing, 1. c, p. 150. 

2 "Public Health, eighth report, 1866," p. 14, note. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 659 

Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colo- 
nies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose miserable 
condition exceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in Eng- 
land, and is almost entirely the result of their bad house accommo- 
dation; and second,, that the crowded and dilapidated condition 
of the houses of these colonies is much worse than was the case 
20 years ago." 1 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of 
London and Newcastle is infernal." 2 

Further, the better-off part of the working-class, together with 
the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower middle 
class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these 
vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as "improvements," 
and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, advance, 
as factories and the afflux of human beings grow in the metropo- 
lis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground-rents "Rents 
have become so heavy that few labouring men can afford more than 
one room." 3 There is almost no house-property in London that 
is not overburdened with a number of middlemen. For the price 
of land in London is always very high in comparison with its 
yearly revenue, and therefore every buyer speculates on getting 
rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation valuation fixed 
by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value 
arising from the neighbourhood of some large establishment. As 
a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of 
"fag-ends of leases." "Gentlemen in this business may be fairly 
expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants 
while they have them, and leave as little as they can for their 
successors." 4 

The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. In 
consequence of the making of railroads in the City, "the spectacle 
has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families 
wandering about some Saturday night with their scanty worldly 



1 1. c, p. 89. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hun- 
ter says: "People are not now alive to tell us how children were brought up 
before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a 
rash prophet who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from 
the present growth of children, who, under circumstances probably never 
before paralleled in this country, are now completing- their education for 
future practice, as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with per- 
sons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and quarrelsome." (1. c, 
p. 56 ) 

M. c , p. 62. 

3 'Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fieids, 1865.' 1 - 

* 'Public Health, eighth report, 1866, p. 91. 



ggO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

goods on their backs, without any resting place but the work- 
house." 1 The workhouses are already over-crowded, and the "im- 
provements" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. 
If labourers are driven away by the demolition of their old 
houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle 
down on its borders, as near as they can get to it. "They try, of 
course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. The 
inhabitants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting 
their two-room tenements into single rooms, and crowding even 
those. . . . Even at an advanced rent, the people who are dis- 
placed will hardly be able to get an accommodation so good as 
the meagre one they have left. . . . Half the workmen ... of 
the Strand . . . walked two miles to their work." 2 This same 
Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing 
idea of the wealth of London, may serve as an example of the 
packing together of human beings in that town. In one of its par- 
ishes, the Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although 
half the width of the Thames was reckoned in. It will be self-un- 
derstood that every sanitary measure, which, as has been the 
case hitherto in London, hunts the labourers from one quarter, 
by demolishing uninhabitable houses, serves only to crowd 
them together yet more closely in another. "Either," says Dr. 
Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an ab- 
surdity, or the public compassion (!) be effectually aroused to the 
obligation which may now be without exaggeration called na- 
tional, of supplying cover to those who by reason of their having 
no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by 
periodical payments reward those who will provide it for them." 3 
Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner of land, of houses, 
the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such 
as railroads, the building of new streets, &amp;c, not only receives 
full indemnity. He must, according to law, human and divine, 
be comforted for his enforced "abstinence" over and above this by 
a thumping profit. The labourer, with his wife and child and 
chattels, is thrown out into the street, and — if he crowds in too 
large numbers towards quartern of the town where the vestries 
insist on decency, he is prosecuted in the name of sanitation! 
Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th centu- 
ry no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. Only five 



J 1. c, p 88. 
2 I. c, p 88. 
8 1. c, p. 89. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 661 

had more than 50,000. Now there are 28 towns with more than 
50,000 inhabitants. 'The result of this change is not only that the 
class of town people is enormously increased, but the old close- 
packed little towns are now centres, built round on every side, 
open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich 
are abandoned by them for the pleasanter outskirts. The succes- 
sors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a 
family to each room [. . . and find accommodation for two or 
three lodgers . . .] and a population, for which the houses were 
not intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings 
are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the children." 1 
The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commer- 
cial town, the more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human 
material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the 
labourers. 

Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district 
of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London in 
the housing inferno. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in 
single rooms. Because of their absolute danger to the community, 
houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the au- 
thorities in Newcastle and Gateshead. The building of new houses 
progresses very slowly, business very quickly. The town was, 
therefore, in 1865, more full than ever. Scarcely a room was to 
let. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever Hospital, says: "There 
can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and 
spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of human beings, 
and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. The rooms, in which 
labourers in many cases live, are situated in confined and unwhole- 
some yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, 
are models of insufficiency and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any 
civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at 
night huddled together; and as regards the men, the night-shift 
succeed the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken 
series for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to 
cool; the whole house badly supplied with water and worse 
with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." 2 The price 
per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. to 3s. "The town of 
Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the 
finest tribe of our countrymen, often sunk by external circum- 
stances of house and street into an almost savage degradation." 3 

1 1. c, pp. 55 and 56. 

2 1. c, p. 149. 

3 1. c, p. 50. 



662 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



As result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the 
state of the dwellings of an industrial town may to-day be bearable, 
to-morrow hideous. Or the sedileship of the town may have pulled 
itself together for the removal of the most shocking abuses. To-mor- 
row, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged 
Irishmen or decayed English agricultural labourers. They are 
stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable la- 
bourer's dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose per- 
sonnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war. 
Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). There the municipal philistine 
was just busied with urban improvements. Besides, there were 
still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabited houses. But now comes 
that revival of trade which the mildly liberal Mr. Forster, the 
negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace. With 
the revival of trade came of course an overflow from the waves 
of the ever fluctuating "reserve army" or "relative surplus-popula- 
tion." The frightful cellar habitations and rooms registered in 
the list, 1 which Dr. Hunter obtained from the agent of an Insurance 



1 COLLECTING AGENTS LIST (BRADFORD) 




Houses 




Vulcan Street, No. 122 . . 


. . 1 


room 


16 persons 


Lumley Street, No. 13 . . 


. 1 




11 


Bower Street, No. 41 ... 


. 1 




11 


Portland Street, No. 112 . 


. 1 




10 


Hardy Street, No. 17 . . . 


. 1 




10 " 


North Street, No. 18 . . . 


. 1 




16 


North Street, No. 17 ... 


. 1 




13 


Wymer Street, No. 19 . . 


. 1 




8 adults 


Jowett Street, No. 56 . . . 


. 1 




12 persons 


George Street, No. 150 . . 


. . 1 




3 families 


Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 


. 1 




11 persons 


Marshall Street, No. 28 . . 


. 1 




10 


Marshall Street, No. 49 . . 


. 3 




3 families 


George Street, No. 128 . . 


. 1 




18 persons 


George Street, No. 130 . . 


. 1 




16 


Edward Street, No. 4 ... 


. 1 




17 


George Street, No. 49 . . . 


. 1 




2 families 


York Street, No. 34 . . . 


. 1 




2 


Salt Pie Street (bottom) . . 


. 2 




26 persons 




Cella 


rs 




Regent Square ...... 


. . 1 


cellar 


8 persons 


Acre Street 


. . 1 


)&gt; 


7 " 


33 Roberts Court 


. . 1 


7 ^ „ 


Back Pratt Street, used as 


a 






brazier's shop 


. . 1 


" 


7 


27 Ebenezer Street .... 


1 


" 


6 " (no male 




1. c, 


P . li. 


above 18) 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 663 

Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers. 
They declared that they would willingly pay for better dwellings 
if they were to be had. Meanwhile, they become degraded, they 
fall ill, one and all, whilst the mildly liberal Forster, M.P., sheds 
tears over the blessings of Free-trade, and the profits of the eminent 
men of Bradford who deal in worsted. In the Report of September, 
1865, Dr. Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford, ascribes 
the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the na- 
ture of their dwellings. "In one small cellar measuring 1,500 cubic 
feet . . . there are ten persons .... Vincent Street, Green 
Aire Place, and the Leys include 223 houses having 1,450 inhabit- 
ants, 435 beds, and 36 privies The beds — and in that 

term I include any roll of dirty old rags, or an armful of shavings — 
have an average of 3.3 persons to each, many have 5 and 6 persons 
to each, and some people, I am told, are absolutely without 
beds; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on the bare boards — 
young men and women, married and unmarried, all together. 
I need scarcely add that many of these dwellings are dark, damp, 
dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit for human habitations; they 
are the centres from which disease and death are distributed 
amongst those in better circumstances, who have allowed them 
thus to fester in our midst." 1 

Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of 
its dwellings. "Bristol, where the blankest poverty and domestic 
misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." 2 

(c.) The Nomad Population 

We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, 
but whose occupation is in great part industrial. They are the light 
infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to 
this point, now to that. When they are not on the march, they 
"camp." Nomad labour is used for various operations of building 
and draining, brick-making, lime-burning, railway-making, &amp;c. 
A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose 
neighbourhood it pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, 
scarlet fever, &amp;c. 3 In undertakings that involve much capital 
outlay, such as railways, &amp;c, the contractor himself generally 
provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus improvising 



1 I. c, p. 114. 

2 1. c, p. 50. 

3 "Public Health. Seventh Report. 1865." o. 18. 



664 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the con- 
trol of the local boards, very profitable to the contractor, who 
exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion— as soldiers of industry 
and as tenants. According as the wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 
holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 
1, 3, or 4 shillings weekly. * One example will suffice. In Septem- 
ber, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances 
Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following 
denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary: — "Small-pox 
cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months 
ago. Shortly before that time, the works for a railway from Lew- 
isham to Tunbridge were commenced here, and, in addition to 
the principal works being in the immediate neighbourhood of 
this town, here was also established the depot for the whole of the 
works, so that a large number of persons was of necessity employed 
here. As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them 
all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works 
by the contractor, Mr. Jay, for their especial occupation. These 
huts possessed no ventilation nor drainage, and, besides, were nec- 
essarily over-crowded, because each occupant had to accommodate 
lodgers, whatever the number in his own family might be, although 
there were only two rooms to each tenement. The consequences 
were, according to the medical report we received, that in the 
night-time these poor people were compelled to endure all the 
horror of suffocation to avoid the pestiferous smells arising from 
the filthy, stagnant water, and the privies close under their win- 
dows. Complaints were at length made to the Nuisances Removal 
Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit these 
huts, and he spoke of their condition as dwellings in the most 
severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very serious 
consequences might ensue, unless some sanitary measures were 
adopted. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appropriate a hut, 
to which persons in his employ, who were suffering from conta- 
gious diseases, might at once be removed. He repeated that prom- 
ise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date of the last 
promise there have been several cases of small-pox in his huts, 
and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has taken no steps 
whatever to carry out his promise. On the 9th September instant, 
Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox 
in the same huts, and he described their condition as most dis- 



l. c, p. 165. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 665 

graceful. I should add, for your (the Home Secretary's) informa- 
tion that an isolated house, called the Pest-house, which is set 
apart for parishioners who might be suffering from infectious dis- 
eases, has been continually occupied by such patients for many 
months past, and is also now occupied; that in one family five 
children died from small-pox and fever; that from the 1st April to 
the 1st September this year, a period of five months, there have 
been no fewer than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four 
of them being in the huts already referred to; that it is impossible 
to ascertain the exact number of persons who have suffered from 
that disease although they are known to be many, from the 
fact of the families keeping it as private as possible." 1 

The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid 
categories of the British proletariat. The price at which they 
buy their wages was shown on an earlier page. 2 Here I merely 
cast a hurried glance over the conditions of their dwellings. As 
a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, 
builds a number of cottages for his hands. They receive cottages 
and coal for firing "for nothing" — i.e., these form part of their 
wages, paid in kind. Those who are not lodged in this way re- 
ceive in compensation £4 per annum. The mining districts attract 
with rapidity a large population, made up of the miners them- 
selves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &amp;c, that group themselves 
around them. The ground-rents are high, as they are general- 
ly where population is dense. The master tries, therefore, to run 
up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, 
just so many cottages as are necessary to pack together his hands 
and their families. If new mines are opened in the neighbourhood, 
or old ones are again set working, the pressure increases. In the 
construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, 



1 1. c, p. 18, Note.— The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith 
Union reported to the Registrar-General as follows: — "At Doveholes, a 
number of small excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime 
ashes (the refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occu- 
pied by labourers and others employed in the construction of a railway now 
in course of construction through that neighbourhood. The excavations are 
small and damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the 
slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled through the top, and 
used for a chimney. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging 
for some time, and some deaths [amongst the troglodytes] have been caused 
by it. "(I. c, note 2.) 

e The details given at the end of Part IV. refer especially to the labour- 
ers in coal mines. On the still worse condition in metal mines, see the very 
conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864. 



666 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the "abstinence" of the capitalist from all expenditure that is not 
absolutely unavoidable. "The lodging which is obtained by the 
pitmen and other labourers connected with the collieries of North- 
umberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, 
on the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large spe- 
cimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of Mon- 
mouthshire excepted. . . . The extreme badness is in the high 
number of men found in one room, in the smallness of the ground- 
plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want 
of water, the absence of privies, and the frequent placing of one 
house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, . . . the 
lessee acts as if the whole colony were encamped, not resident." 1 

"In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I vis- 
ited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham Union. 
. . . . With very few exceptions, the general statement that no 
means are taken to secure the health of the inhabitants would 
be true of all of them. . . . All colliers are bound ['bound,' 
an expression which, like bondage, dates from the age of serf- 
dom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months 

If the colliers express discontent, or in any way annoy the 
'viewer,' a mark of memorandum is made against their names, 

and, at the annual 'binding,' such men are turned off 

It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be 
worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts. 
The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surround- 
ed with pestiferous influences; he cannot help himself, and it 
appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his 
proprietor (he is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and 
his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is 
tolerably certain. The collier is also often supplied with water 
by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has 
to pay for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages." 2 

In conflict with "public opinion," or even with the Officers of 
Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying" the con- 
ditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines 
the working and domestic life of the labourer, on the ground 
that they are necessary for profit. It is the same thing when 
capital "abstains" from protective measures against dangerous 
machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and 
for safety in mines, &amp;c. It is the same here ;with the housing 



1 I. c, pp. 180, 182. 

2 I.e., pp. 515, 517, 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 667 

of the miners. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, 
in his official Report says: "In apology for the wretched house- 
hold accommodation ... it is alleged t^at miners are commonly 
worked on lease; that the duration of the lessee's interest (which 
in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he 
should deem it worth his while to create good accommodation for 
his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the 
work attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in 
the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by 
his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground-rent, an exor- 
bitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the sur- 
face of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the 
labourers of the subterranean property ought to inhabit, and 
that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes 
others who might desire to build. It would be foreign to the 
purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits 
of the above apology. Nor here is it even needful to consider where 
it would be that, if decent accommodation were provided, the 
cost . . . would eventually fall— whether on landlord, or 
lessee, or labourer, or public. But in presence of such shameful 
facts as are vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr. Hun- 
ter, Dr. Stevens, &amp;c] a remedy may well be claimed 

Claims of landlordship are being so used as to do great public 
wrong. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an 
industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity 
of surface-owner makes it impossible that the labourers whom 
he collects, should find proper lodging where they must live. 
The lessee [the capitalist exploiter] meanwhile has no pecuniary 
motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing 
that if its latter conditions be exorbitant, the consequences fail, 
not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not educa- 
tion enough to know the value of their sanitary rights, that nei- 
ther obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreci- 
able inducements towards a 'strike.'" 1 

(d.) Effect of Crises on the best paid part of the Working-Class 

Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, 1 may be 
allowed to show, by one example, how industrial revulsions 
affect even the best-paid, the aristocracy, of the working-class. 
It will be remembered that the year 1857 brought one of the great 

1 i. c, p. lb. 



G68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. The 
next termination of the cycle was due in 1866. Already dis- 
counted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, 
which threw much capital from its wonted sphere into the great 
centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this time, an 
especially financial character. Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised 
by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed 
by the collapse of countless swindling companies. One of the great 
London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe was 
iron shipbuilding. The magnates of this trade had not only over- 
produced beyond all measure during the overtrading time, but 
they had, besides, engaged in enormous contracts on the specu- 
lation that credit would be forthcoming to an equivalent extent. 
Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end 
of March, 1867) continues in this and other London industries. l 
To show the condition of the labourers, I quote the following from 
the circumstantial report of a correspondent of the Morning Star, 
who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867, visited the chief 
centres of distress: "In the East End districts of Poplar, Mill- 
wall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse and Canning Town, at 
least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter 
destitution, and 3,000 skilled mechanics were breaking stones 
in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's dura- 
tion) I had great difficulty in reaching the workhouse 

door, for a hungry crowd besieged it. . . . They were wait- 
ing for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for the 
distribution. The yard was a great square place with an open shed 
running all round it, and several large heaps of snow covered the 
paving-stones in the middle. In the middle, also, were little 
wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the 



1 "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor. ... Within the last few 
days the walls of London have been placarded with large posters, bearing 
the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The 
fat oxen from their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxu- 
rious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die in their wretched 
dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain inter- 
vals. No sooner has one set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set 
is placarded in the former, or some equally public place. ... this ... reminds 
one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French peo- 
ple for the events of 1789.... At this moment, while English workmen with 
their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are mil- 
lions of English gold— the produce of English labour— being invested in 
Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign enterprises." — Reynolds' 
Newspaper, January 20th, 1867. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 669 

men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens were so snowed 
up that nobody could sit in them. Men were busy, however, in 
the open shed breaking paving-stones into macadam. Each man 
had a big paving-stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the 
rime-covered granite with a big hammer until he had broken up, 
and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, 
and got his day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. 
In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, 
and when we opened the door of it, we found it filled with men 
who were huddled together shoulder to shoulder, for the warmth 
of one another's bodies and breath. They were picking oakum and 
disputing the while as to which could work the longest on a given 
quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour. 
Seven thousand ... in this one workhouse . . . were reci- 
pients of relief . . . many hundreds of them ... it ap- 
peared, were, six or eight months ago, earning the highest wages 
paid to artisans Their number would be more than dou- 
bled by the count of those who, having exhausted all their sav- 
ings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little 
left to pawn. Leaving the workhouse, I took a walk through the 
streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neigh- 
bourhood of Poplar. My guide was a member of the Committee 

of the Unemployed My first call was on an ironworker 

who had been seven and twenty weeks out of employment. I 
found the man with his family sitting in a little back room. The 
room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it. This was 
necessary to keep the naked feet of the young children from get- 
ting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day. On a tray in front 
of the fire lay a quantity of oakum, which the wife and children 
were picking in return for their allowance from the parish. The 
man Avorked in the stone yard of the workhouse for a certain ra- 
tion of food, and threepence per day. He had now come home to 
dinner quite hungry, as he told us with a melancholy smile, and 
his dinner consisted of a couple of slices of bread and dripping, 

and a cup of milkless tea The next door at which we 

knocked was opened by a middle-aged woman, who, without say- 
ing a word, led us into a little back parlour, in which sat all her 
family, silent and fixedly staring at a rapidly dying fire. Such 
desolation, such hopelessness was about these people and their 
little room, as I should not care to witness again. 'Nothing have 
they done, sir,' said the woman, pointing to her boys, 'for six 
and twenty weeks; and all our money gone — all the twenty 
pounds that me and father saved when times were better, thinking 



g70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

it would yield a little to keep us when we got past work. Look 
at it,' she said, almost fiercely,, bringing out a bank-book with 
all its well-kept entries of money paid in, and money taken out, 
so that we could see how the little fortune had begun with the 
first five shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to 
be twenty pounds, and how it had melted down again till the 
sum in hand got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made 
the book as worthless as a blank sheet. This family received relief 
from the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty 
meal per day. . . . Our next visit was to an iron labourer's 
wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. We found her 
ill from want of food, lying on a mattress in her clothes, and just 
covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been 
pawned. Two wretched children were tending her, themselves 
looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. Nineteen 
weeks of enforced idleness had brought them to this pass, and 
while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she moaned 
as if all her faith in a future that should atone for it were dead. 
.... On getting outside a young fellow came running 
after us, and asked us to step inside his house and see if 
anything could be done for him. A young wife, two pretty 
children, a cluster of pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he 
had to show." 

On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract 
from a Tory newspaper. It must not be forgotten that the East- 
end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of 
the iron shipbuilding mentioned above, but also of a so-called 
"home-industry" always underpaid. "A frightful spectacle was 
to be seen yesterday in one part of the metropolis. Although the 
unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with 
their black flags en masse, the human torrent was imposing 
enough. Let us remember what these people suffer. They are dying 
of hunger. That is the simple and terrible fact. There are 40,000 
of them. ... In our presence, in one quarter of this wonder- 
ful metropolis, are packed— next door to the most enormous 
accumulation of wealth the world ever saw — cheek by jowl 
with this are 40,000 helpless, starving people. These thousands 
are now breaking in upon the other quarters; always half-starv- 
ing, they cry their misery in our ears, they cry to Heaven, they 
tell us from their miserable dwellings, that it is impossible for 
them to find work, and useless for them to beg. The local ratepay- 
ers themselves are driven by the parochial charges to the verge 
of pauperism,"--- (S tandard, 5th April, 1867.) 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 671 

As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote 
Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of 
labour," or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital," is there 
limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions, nor by Fac- 
tory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness" of the Belgian labour- 
er. Assuredly no one was more thoroughly initiated in the mys- 
teries of this happiness than the late M. Ducpetiaux, inspector- 
general of Belgian prisons and charitable institutions, and mem- 
ber of the central commission of Belgian statistics. Let us take 
his work: "Budgets economiques des classes ouvrieres de la Bel- 
gique," Bruxelles, 1855. Here we find among other matters, a 
normal Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and ex- 
penditure he calculates on very exact data, and whose conditions 
of nourishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sail- 
or, and prisoner. The family "consists of father, mother, and four 
children." Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed 
the whole year through." It is assumed that "there is no sick per- 
son nor one incapable of work, among them," nor are there "ex- 
penses for religious, moral, and intellectual purposes, except a 
very small sum for church sittings," nor "contributions to savings 
banks or benefit societies," nor "expenses due to luxury or the re- 
sult of improvidence." The father and eldest son, however, allow 
themselves "the use of tobacco," and on Sundays "go to the cabaret," 
for which a whole 86 centimes a week are reckoned. "From a gen- 
eral compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different 
trades, it follows that the highest average of daily wage is 1 franc 
56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, 
and 55 centimes for girls. Calculated at this rate, the resources 
of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs 
a-year ... In the family. . . taken as typical we have cal- 
culated all possible resources. But in ascribing wages to the mother 
of the family we raise the question of the direction of the household. 
How will its internal economy be cared for? Who will look after 
the young children? Who will get ready the meals, do the washing 
and mending? This is the dilemma incessantly presented to the 
labourers." 

According to this the budget of the family is: 

The father 300 working-days at fr. 1.56 fr. 468 

" mother " " " " " 89 " 267 

" boy " " " " " 56 " 168 

" gir] " " " " " 55 " 165 



Total fr. 1,068 



672 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit 
upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of: 

The man of war's man fr. 1,828 Deficit I'r. 760 

" soldier " 1,473 " "405 

" prisoner " 1,112 " " 44 

"We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say 
the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the prisoner. 
The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different 
prisons during the period 1847-1849), has been 63 centimes for 
all prisons. This figure, compared with that of the daily mainte- 
nance of the labourer, shows a difference of 13 centimes. It must 
be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set 
down in the account the expenses of administration and surveil- 
lance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their 
lodging; that the purchases they make at the canteens are not in- 
cluded in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses 
are greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of per- 
sons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for or 
buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their 
consumption. . . . How comes it, however, that a great num- 
ber, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more 
economical way? It is . . .by adopting expedients, the secret 
of which only the labourer knows; by reducing his daily rations; 
by substituting rye-bread for wheat; by eating less meat, or even 
none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by content- 
ing themselves with one or two rooms where the family is 
crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on 
the same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency; by 
giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning them- 
selves to the most painful privations. Once arrived at this ex- 
treme limit, the least rise in the price of food, stoppage of work, 
illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his com- 
plete ruin; debts accumulate, credit fails, the most necessary 
clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be 
enrolled on the list of paupers." (Ducpetiaux, 1. c, pp. 151, 154, 
155.) In Pact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on 
the smallest change in the price of the most essential means of 
subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See 
Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 
1860, pp. 15, 16.) In all Belgium are 930,000 families, of whom, 
according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the 
list of voters =450,000 persons; 390,000 families of the lower 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 673 

middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them con- 
stantly sinking into the proletariat, =1,950,000 persons. Finally, 
450,000 working-class families =2,250,000 persons, of whom the 
model ones enjoy the happiness depicted by Ducpetiaux. Of the 
450,000 working-class families, over 200,000 are on the pauper 
list. 

(e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat 

Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic pro- 
duction and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in 
the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) 
and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer. Be- 
fore I turn to his present situation, a rapid retrospect. Modern 
agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th century, 
although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed 
mode of production starts as a basis, has a much earlier date. 

If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observ- 
er, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural labourer 
of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his 
predecessor of the end of the 14th century, "when the labourer 
. . . could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," 1 not to 
speak of the 15th century, "the golden age of the English labour- 
er in town and country." We need not, however, go back so far. 
In a very instructive work of the year 1777 we read: "The great 
farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman] ; 
while the poor labourer is depressed almost to the earth. His un- 
fortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative 
view of it, only forty years ago, and at present. . . . Landlord 
and tenant . . . have both gone hand in hand in keeping the 
labourer down." 2 It is then proved in detail that the real agri- 

cultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly -7- or 25 per cent. 

"Modern policy," says Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more 
favourable to the higher classes of people; and the consequences 



1 James E. Thorold Rogers. (Prof, of Polit. Econ. in the University 
of Oxford.) "A History of Agriculture and Prices in England." Oxford, 1866, 
v. 1, p. 690. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains 
in the two volumes that have so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 
1400. The second volume contains simply statistics. It is the first authen- 
tic "History of Prices" of the time that we possess. 

2 "Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative 
view of the prices of labour and provisions." Lond., 1777, pp. 5, 11. 



674 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

may in time prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only 
gentry and beggars, or of grandees and slaves." 1 

Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labour- 
er from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and dwelling, as 
well as to his self-respect, amusements, &amp;c, is an ideal never 
attained again since that time. His average wage expressed in 
pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time 
(1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60. 2 

The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti- 
Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers, manu- 
facturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, 
&amp;c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has been already 
indicated above. The nominal wages rose in consequence part- 
ly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a rise in the price of 
the primary means of subsistence independent of this deprecia- 
tion. But the actual wage-variation can be evidenced in a very 
simple way, without entering into details that are here unneces- 
sary. The Poor Law and its administration were in 1795 and 1814 
the same. It will be remembered how this law was carried out 
in the country districts: in the form of alms the parish made up 
the nominal wage to the nominal sum required for the simple veg- 
etation of the labourer. The ratio between the wages paid by the 
farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the parish, shows us 
two things. First, the falling of wages below their minimum; 
second, the degree in which the agricultural labourer was a com- 
pound of wage-labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had 
been turned into a serf of his parish. Let us take one county that 
represents the average condition of things in all counties. In North- 
amptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. 6d.; 
the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6 persons, £36 12s. 
5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the par- 
ish, £6 14s. 5d. In 1814, in the same county, the weekly wage 
was 12s. 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 per- 
sons, £54 18s. 4d.; their total income, £36 2s.; deficit made 



1 Dr. Richard Price: "Observations on Reversionary Payments," 6th 
Ed. By W. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. II., pp. 158, 159. Price remarks on p. 
159: "The nominal price of day-labour is at present no more than about four 
times, or, at most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. But the 
price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and raiment about fifteen 
times higher. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advanc- 
ing in proportion to the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not 
appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses that it did 
bear." 

2 Barton, 1. c, p. 26. For the end ol the 18th century cl. Eden, 1. c. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 675 

good by the parish, £18 6s. 4d. * In 1795 the deficit was less than 

-j the wage, in 1814, more than half. It is self-evident that, under 

these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found 
in the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814. 2 
Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer, the instru- 
mentum vocale, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst 
nourished, the most brutally treated. 

The same state of things went on quietly until "the Swing 
riots, in 1830, revealed to us (i.e., the ruling classes) by the 
light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous 
discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface of 
agricultural as of manufacturing England." 3 At this time, Sad- 
ler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural labour- 
ers "white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper 
House. The most notable political economist of that period — 
E. G. Wakefield— says: "The peasant of the South of England 
... is not a freeman, nor is he a slave; he is a pauper." 4 

The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new 
light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. On the one 
hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove 
how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers of the 
corn. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed 
with sullen rage at the denunciations of the factory system by 
the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes 
of the factory operatives, of those utterly corrupt, heartless, and 
genteel loafers, and at their "diplomatic zeal" for factory legis- 
lation. It is an old English proverb that "when thieves fall out, 
honest men come by their own," and, in fact, the noisy, passion- 
ate quarrel between the two fractions of the ruling class about 
the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more 
shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. Earl 
Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the 
aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign. He was, there- 
fore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the revelations of the Morn- 
ing Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers. 
This journal, then the most important Liberal organ, sent spe- 
cial commissioners into the agricultural districts, who did not 
content themselves with mere general descriptions and statistics* 



1 Parry, i. c, p. 86 

2 id., p. 213. 

8 S Laing, ]. c, p. 62. 

4 'England and America/' Lond., 1833, Vol I., p 47. 



676 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



but published the names both of the labouring families ex- 
amined and of their landlords. The following list gives the wages 
paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford, Wim- 
bourne, and Poole. The villages are the property of Mr. G. Bankes 
and of the Earl of Shaftesbury. It will be noted that, just like 
Bankes, this "low church pope," this head of English pietists, 
pockets a great part of the miserable wages of the labourers 
under the pretext of house-rent: — 



FIRST VILLAGE 



a 

S-i 

-o 


O) Si • 






eekly 
e of 
hole 

y. 




tal 

y wage 
deduc- 
1 Rent. 


o 


si 

o 






£&amp;2 


S a, S 


*s 




*h 


rt~ 


5o5 




§^s 


$J=3£ 






gpjg 






s. d. 




s. d. 


s.d. 


s.d. 


s.d. 


2 


4 


8 


— 


8 


2 


6 


1 6 


3 


5 


8 


— 


8 


1 6 


6 6 


1 3 1 /, 


2 


4 


8 


— 


8 


1 


7 


1 9 


2 


4 


8 


— 


8 


1 


7 


1 9 


6 


8 


7 


l/-,l/6, 


10 6 


2 


8 6 


i o»; 4 


3 


5 


7 


1/-.2/- 


7 


1 4 


5 8 


l IV, 



SECOND VILLAGE 







s. d. 




s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


6 


8 


7 


1/-.1/6, 


10 


1 6 


8 6 


1 0&gt;/ 4 


6 


8 


7 


V-,1/6, 


7 


1 3 1 /, 


5 8V, 


8V, 


8 


10 


7 


— 


7 


1 3V, 


5 8\/ 2 


7 


4 


6 


7 


— 


7 


1 6«/ 2 


5 5 l / 2 


11 


3 


5 


7 


— 


7 


1 6V 2 


5 5V. 


1 1 



THIRD VILLAGE 







s. d 




s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


4 


6 


7 


— 


7 


1 


6 


1 


3 


5 


7 


1/-.2/-, 


11 6 


10 


10 8 


2 IV, 





2 


5 


1/-.2/6, 


5 


1 


4 


2 1 



1 London Economist, March 29lh, 1845, p. 290. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 677 

The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to 
English agriculture. 1 Drainage on the most extensive scale, new 
methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation of green 
crops, introduction of mechanical manuring apparatus, new 
treatment of clay soils, increased use of mineral manures, employ- 
ment of the steam-engine, and of all kinds of new machinery, 
more intensive cultivation generally, characterised this epoch. 
Mr. Pusey, Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, de- 
clares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced 
nearly one half by the introduction of new machinery. On the other 
hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly. Greater outlay of 
capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentra- 
tion of farms, were essential conditions of the new method. 2 
At the same time, the area under cultivation increased, from 1846 
to 1856, by 464,119 acres, without reckoning the great area in the 
Eastern Counties which was transformed from rabbit warrens and 
poor pastures into magnificent corn-fields. It has already been seen 
that, at the same time, the total number of persons employed in 
agriculture fell. As far as the actual agricultural labourers of both 
sexes and of all ages are concerned, their number fell from 
1,241,396, in 1851, to 1,163,217 in 1861. 3 If the English Regis- 
trar-General, therefore, rightly remarks: "The increase of farm- 
ers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of proportion 
. , . to the increase of agricultural produce," 4 this dispropor- 
tion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive 
decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with 
increase of the area under cultivation, with more intensive cul- 
tivation, unheard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated 
with the soil, and devoted to its working, an augmentation in 



1 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course 
per Parliament, funds from the State Treasury, at a very low rate of interest, 
which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate. 

2 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in 
the census category: "Farmer's son, grandson, brother, nephew, daughter, 
grand-daughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, em- 
ployed by the farmer. This category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; 
in 1861, only 176,151. From 1851 to 1871, the farms under 20 acres fell by 
more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 
6,370; the same thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. On the 
other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of large farms in- 
creased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more 
than 500 acres from 2,755 to 3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 
492 to 582. 

8 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559. 
* Census 1. c, p. 36. 



678 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

the products of the soil without parallel in the history of Eng- 
lish agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of landlords, and growing 
wealth of the capitalist farmers. If we take this, together with 
the swift, unbroken extension of the markets, viz., the towns, 
and the reign of Free-trade, then the agricultural labourer was 
at last, post tot discrimina rerum, placed in circumstances that 
ought, secundum artem, to have made him drunk with happiness. 

But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of 
the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak of his 
predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th centu- 
ry, but only compared with his predecessor from 1770 to 1780, 
has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the 
peasant has again become a serf," and a serf worse fed and worse 
clothed. 1 Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epoch-making report on the 
dwellings of the agricultural labourers, says: "The cost of the 
hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the 
time of serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which 
he can live .... the supplies of wages and shelter are not cal- 
culated on the profit to be derived from him. He is a zero in farm- 
ing calculations. 2 .... The means [of subsistence] being 
always supposed to be a fixed quantity. 3 As to any further reduc- 
tion of his income, he may say, nihil habeo nihil euro. He has no 
fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply 
necessary to keep him. He has reached the zero from which are 
dated the calculations of the farmer. Come what will, he has no 
share either in prosperity or adversity." 4 

In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the con- 
ditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned 
to transportation and penal servitude. The results are record- 
ed in two voluminous Blue books. Among other things it is said: 
"From an elaborate comparison between the diet of convicts 
in the convict prisons in England, and that of paupers in work- 
houses and of free labourers in the same country ... it cer- 
tainly appears that the former are much better fed than either of 



1 Rogers, I. c, p. 693, p. 10. Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, 
is a personal friend of Cobden and Bright, and therefore no laudator temporis 
acti. 

2 "Public Health. Seventh Report," 1865, p. 242. It is therefore nothing 
unusual either for the landlord to raise a labourer's rent as soon as he hears 
that he is earning a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the la- 
bourer, "because his wife has found a trade," 1. c. 

8 1. c, p. 135. 
• 1. c, p. 134. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 



679 



the two other classes," x whilst "the amount of labour required 
from an ordinary convict under penal servitude is about one half 
of what would be done by an ordinary day-labourer." 2 A few char- 
acteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the 
Edinburgh prison, deposes: No. 5056. "The diet of the English 
prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England." 
No. 50. "It is the fact . . . that the ordinary agricultural la- 
bourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer 
No. 3047. "Is there anything that you are aware of to account for 
the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary la- 
bourers? — Certainly not." No. 3048. "Do you think that further 
experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a 
dietary might not be hit upon for prisoners employed on public 
works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers?'' 3 . . . 
"He [the agricultural labourer] might say: 'I work hard, and 
have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work hard- 
er where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me 
to be in prison again than here.'" 4 From the tables appended to 
the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed com- 
parative summary. 

WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIMENT 





Quantity 
of Nitrogen- 
ous Ingre- 
dients 


Quantity of 
Non-Nitro- 
genous In- 
gredients 


Quantity of 
Mineral 
Matter 


Total 


Portland (convict) . . 
Sailor in the Navy . . 

Soldier 

Working Coachmaker . 

Compositor 

Agricultural labourer . 


Ounces 
28.95 
29.63 
25.55 
24.53 
21.24 
17.73 


Ounces 

150.06 

152.91 

114.49 

162.06 

100.83 

118.06 


Ounces 
4.68 
4.52 
3.94 
4.23 
3.12 
3.29 


Ounces 
183.69 
187.06 
143.98 
190.82 
125.19 
139.08 5 



The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission 
of 1863, on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already known 



1 "Report of the Commissioners ... relating to Transportation and Penal 
Servitude," Lond., 1863, pp. 42, 50. 

p. 77. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice." 
Vol. II, Minutes of Evidence. 
Vol. I. Appendix, p. 280. 



2 1. c. 

3 1. c. 

4 1. c. 



5 1. c, pp. 274, 275. 



630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

to the reader. He will remember that the diet of a great part of 
the agricultural labourers' families is below the minimum necessary 
"to arrest starvation diseases." This is especially the case in 
all the purely rural districts of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilts, 
Stafford, Oxford, Berks, and Herts. "The nourishment ob- 
tained by the labourer himself," says Dr. E. Smith, "is larger 
than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share 
.... necessary to enable him to perform his labour ... .of 
food than the other members of the family, including in the poor- 
er districts nearly all the meat and bacon .... The quantity 
of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the pe- 
riod of rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, 
deficient, and particularly in nitrogen." 1 The male and female 
servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nour- 
ished. Their number fell from 288,277 in 1851, to 204,962 in 1861. 
"The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever 
may be its disadvantages, .... is under present circum- 
stances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that 
amount of income which . . . provides shoes and clothing and 
pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." 2 
One of the most remarkable results of the inquiry was that the 
agricultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of 
the United Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed," as the ap- 
pended table shows: 

Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an 
average agricultural adult: 

Carbon, Nitrogen, 





grains 


grains 


England . . 


46,673 


1,594 


Wales . . . 


48,354 


2,031 


Scotland . . 


48,980 


2,348 


Ireland . . 


43,366 


2,434 3 



1 "Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, pp. 238, 249, 261, 262. 

2 1. c, p. 262. 

8 1. c, p. 17. The English agricultural labourer receives only */4 as much 
milk, and J4 as much bread as the Irish. Arthur Young in his "Tour in 
Ireland," at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nour- 
ishment of the latter. The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer 
is incomparably more humane than the rich English. As regards Wales, that 
which is said in the text holds only for the south-west. All the doctors there 
agree that the increase of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., 
increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical condition of the 
population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. "His (the farm labour- 
er's) keep is reckoned at about five pence a day, but in many districts it was 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 681 

'To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the 
house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his 
official Health Report, "by our agricultural labourers, almost 
every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. And gradual- 
ly, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these re- 
spects has been deteriorating, house-room being now greatly more 
difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable 
to his needs than, perhaps, for centuries had been the case. 
Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has 



said to be of much less cost to the farmer" [himself very poor].... "A morsel of 
the salt meat or bacon, ... salted and dried to the texture of mahogany, and 
hardly worth the difficult process of assimilation ... is used to flavour a largo 
quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this is the 
labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh 
and damp climate, in "the abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in 
favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger drinks for 
so-called tea. "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and 
rain, gains his cottage to sit by a fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal 
kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids are 
poured forth. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which 
was there before the hut was built, his roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. 
Every crevice is topped to maintain warmth, and in an atmosphere of dia- 
bolic odour, with a mud floor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he 
often sups and sleeps with his wife and children. Obstetricians who have 
passed parts of the night in such cabins have described how they found their 
feet sinking in the mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill 
a hole through the wall to effect a little private respiration. It was attested 
by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary in- 
fluences, and many more, the underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of 
the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no w T ant of evidence 
....The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardigan- 
shire show in a striking way the same state of things. There is besides "a plague 
more horrible still, the great number of idiots." Now a word on the climatic 
conditions. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 
months in the year, bringing with it torrents of rain, which discharge princi- 
pally upon the western slopes of the hills. Trees are rare, except in sheltered 
places, and where not protected, are blown out of all shape. The cottages gener- 
ally crouch under some bank, or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but 
the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures.... The young 
people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamorgan and Monmouth. 
Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground of the mining population and their 
hospital. The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus 
in Cardiganshire: 

1851. 1861. 

Males 45,155 44,446 

Females 52,459 52,955 

97.614 97,401 

Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health, Seventh Report. 1865.," pp 498-502, 
passim. 



gg2 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

been in very rapid increase, and the household circumstances 
of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. Except 
in so far as they whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with 
a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the 
matter. Whether he shall find house-room on the land which he 
contributes to till, whether the house-room which he gets shall 
be human or swinish, whether he shall have the little space of 
garden that so vastly lessens the pressure of his poverty— all 
this does not depend on his willingness and ability to pay rea- 
sonable rent for the decent accommodation he requires, but de- 
pends on the use which others may see fit to make of their 'right 
to do as they will with their own.' However large may be a farm, 
there is no law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings 
(much less of decent dwellings) shall be upon it; nor does any law 
reserve for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to which 
his industry is as needful as sun and rain .... An extraneous 
element weighs the balance heavily against him .... the in- 
fluence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settlement 
and chargeability. 1 Under this influence, each parish has a pecu- 
niary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resi- 
dent labourers: — for, unhappily, agricultural labour instead 
of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hard- 
working labourer and his family, implies for the most part only 
a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism 
which, during the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or 
temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse 
to parochial relief — and thus all residence of agricultural pop- 
ulation in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor-rates 
.... Large proprietors 2 .... have but to resolve that 
there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their 
estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their respon- 
sibility for the poor. How far it has been intended, in the English 
constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property 
in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord, 'doing as he 
wills with his own,' should be able to treat the cultivators of the 
soil as aliens, whom he may expel from his territory, is a ques- 
tion which I do not pretend to discuss .... For that (power) 



1 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. It will soon be learnt 
from experience that tinkering of this sort is of no use. 

2 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that 
"Close Villages" are those whose owners are one or two large landlords. "Open 
villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. It is in the lat- 
ter that building speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 683 

of eviction .... does not exist only in theory. On a very large 
scale it prevails in practice — prevails .... as a main governing 
condition in the household circumstances of agricultural la- 
bour .... As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice 
to refer to the evidence which Dr. Hunter has compiled from 
the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding 
increased local demands for them, had, during the last ten years, 
been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, 
so that irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become 
non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work), these 
parishes and townships were receiving in 1861, as compared with 

1 1 

1851, a population 5^- per cent, greater, into house-room k-r per 

cent, less .... When the process of depopulation has com- 
pleted itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is a show-village where 
the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but 
persons who are needed as shepherds, gardeners, or game-keepers, 
are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treat- 
ment usual to their class. l But the land requires cultivation, and 
it will be found that the labourers employed upon it are not the 
tenants of the owner, but that they come from a neighbouring 
open village, perhaps three miles off, where a numerous small 
proprietary had received them when their cottages were destroyed 
in the close villages around. Where things are tending to the 
above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their un- 
repaired and wretched condition, to the extinction to which they 
are doomed. They are seen standing in the various stages of nat- 
ural decay. While the shelter holds together, the labourer is per- 
mitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even 
at the price of decent lodging. But no repair, no improvement 
shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can sup- 
ply. And when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable— unin- 
habitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom— it will 
be but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will 
be somewhat lightened. While great owners are thus escaping 
from poor-rates through the depopulation of lands over which 



1 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the vil- 
lages that Catherine II. saw on her journey to the Crimea. In recent times the 
shepherd also has often been banished from these show-villages; e.g., near 
Market Harboro 'is a sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the 
labour of one man. To reduce the long trudges over these wide plains, the beau- 
tiful pastures of Leicester and Northampton, the shepherd used to get a cot- 
tage on the farm. Now they give him a thirteenth shilling a week for lodging, 
that he must find far away in au open village. 



634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

they have control, the nearest town or open village receive the 
evicted labourers: the nearest, I say, but this "nearest" may mean 
three or four miles distant from the farm where the labourer 
has his daily toil. To that daily toil there will then have to be add- 
ed, as though it were nothing, the daily need of walking six or 
eight miles for power of earning his bread. And whatever farm- 
work is done by his wife and children, is done at the same disad- 
vantage. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occa- 
sions him. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps 
of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the cheap- 
est of all possible hovels. And into those wretched habitations 
(which, even if they adjoin the open country, have some of the 
worst features of the worst town residences) crowd the agricul- 
tural labourers of England. 1 .... Nor on the other hand must 
it be supposed that even when the labourer is housed upon the 
lands which he cultivates, his household circumstances are gener- 
ally such as his life of productive industry would seem to deserve. 
Even on princely estates .... his cottage .... may be of 
the meanest description. There are landlords who deem any 
stye good enough for their labourer and his family, and who 
yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bar- 
gain for rent. 2 It may be but a ruinous one-bedroomed hut, hav- 



1 "The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always 
over-crowded) are usually in rows, built with their backs against the extreme 
edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account 
are not allowed light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 
1. c, p. 135.) Very often the beerseller or grocer of the village is at the same 
time the letter of its houses. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him 
a second master, besides the farmer. He must be his customer as well as his 
tenant. "The hind with his 10s. a week, minus a rent of £4 a year ... is obliged 
to buy at the seller's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, can- 
dles, and beer." (1. c, p. 132.) These open villages form, in fact, the "penal 
settlements" of the English agricultural proletariat. Many of the cottages are 
simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood 
passes. The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly 
wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions, a thoroughness and purity 
of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. It is, of course, the fashion 
amongst the aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at 
the building speculators, the small landlords, and the open villages. They 
know well enough that their "close villages" and "show-villages" are the birth- 
places of the open villages, and could not exist without them. "The labour- 
ers ... were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the most part, have 
to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work." (1. c, p. 135.) The 
system of "open" and "closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties 
and throughout the East of England. 

2 "The employer .... is .... directly or indirectly securing to himself the 
profit on a man employed at 10s. a week, and receiving from this poor hind £4 



THE OENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 685 

ing no fire-grate, no privy, no opening window, no water supply 
but the ditch, no garden — but the labourer is helpless against the 
wrong. . . . And the Nuisances Removal Acts .... are .... 
a mere dead letter ... in great part dependent for their work- 
ing on such cottage-owners as the one from whom his (the labour- 
er's) hovel is rented. . . . From brighter, but exceptional scenes, 
it is requisite in the interests of justice, that attention should 
again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which 
are a reproach to the civilisation of England. Lamentable in- 
deed, must be the case, when, notwithstanding all that is evn 
dent with regard to the quality of the present accommodation, 
it is the common conclusion of competent observers that even 
the general badness of dwellings is an evil infinitely less urgent 
than their mere numerical insufficiency. For years the over-crowd- 
ing of rural labourers' dwellings has been a matter of deep con- 
cern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to per^ 
sons who care for decent and moral life. For, again and again 
in phrases so uniform that they seem stereotyped, reporters on 
the spread of epidemic disease in rural districts, have insisted 
on the extreme importance of that over-crowding, as an influ- 
ence which renders it a quite hopeless task, to attempt the limit- 
ing of any infection which is introduced. And again and again 
it has been pointed out that, notwithstanding the many salubri- 
ous influences which there are in country life, the crowding which 
so favours the extension of contagious disease, also favours the 
origination of disease which is not contagious. And those who 
have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population 
have not been silent as to a further mischief. Even where their 
primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often 
almost perforce they have referred to other relations on the 
subject. In showing how frequently it happens that adult per- 
sons of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled togeth- 
er in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have carried the 
conviction that, under the circumstances they describe, decency 



or £b annual rent for houses not worth j£20 in a really free market, but main- 
tained at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, 
or go seek a hiring elsewhere, without a character from me.' .... Does a man 
wish to better himself, to go as a plate-layer on the railway, or to begin quar- 
ry-work, the same power is ready with 'Work for me at this low rate of 
wages, or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with you, and get what you 
can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be 
better served by it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by 
the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his service." (Dr. Hun- 
ter, 1. c, p. 132.) 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



must always be outraged, and morality almost of necessity must 
suffer. x Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annu- 
al report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an outbreak of fever at Wing, 
in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who had come 
thither from Wingrave with fever, "in the first days of his illness 
slept in a room with nine other persons. Within a fortnight sev- 
eral of these persons were attacked, and in the course of a few 
weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died". . . . From 
Dr. Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on private professional 
business, visited Wing during the time of the epidemic, I re- 
ceived information exactly in the sense of the above report. . . 
"A young woman having fever, lay at night in a room occupied 
by her father and mother, her bastard child, two young men (her 
brothers), and her two sisters, each with a bastard child— 10 per- 
sons in all. A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it." 2 

Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural la- 
bourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all 
counties of England. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (of- 
ten at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only two, and 
250, more than two. I will give a few specimens culled from a 
dozen counties. 

(1 .) Bedfordshire 

Wrestlingworth. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, 
although many are smaller than this. The small, one-storied 
cots are often divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed 
frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in height. Rent, £3 a year. 
The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only 
supplies a hole. As soon as one has made a privy, it is made use 
of by the whole neighbourhood. One house, belonging to a fami- 
ly called Richardson, was of quite unapproachable beauty. "Its 
plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. One 
gable end was convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfor- 



1 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and 
sisters: and though instances must not be recorded, sufficient data are remem- 
bered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are 
the lot of the female participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 
1. c, p. 137.) A member of the rural police who had for many years been a de- 
tective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their 
boldness and shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police 

life and detective duty in the worst parts of London They live like 

pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in 
many instances." ("Child. Empl. Com. Sixth Report, 1867," p. 77 sq. 155.) 

2 "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1865," pp. 9, 14 passim. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 687 

tunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like 
an elephant's trunk. A long stick served as prop to prevent the 
chimney from falling. The doorway and window were rhomboi- 
dal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, 
and those four over-crowded. The cots with one bedroom shel- 
tered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, 
&amp;c. 

Dunton. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 
10s. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of the fam- 
ily. The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work 
together to pay it. Six adults, living with 4 children in one sleep- 
ing apartment, pay £3 10s. for it. The cheapest house in Dun- 
ton, 15 feet long externally, 10 broad, let for £3. Only one of 
the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. A little outside the vil- 
lage, a house whose "tenants dunged against the house-side," 
the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; 
the doorway, a single opening closed at night by a few bricks, 
ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some mat- 
ting. Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of 
all flesh. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3 adults 
and 5 children. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade 
Union. 



(2.) Berkshire 

Beenham. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children 
lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). A daughter came home 
from service with scarlet fever. She died. One child sickened 
and died. The mother and one child were down with typhus 
when Dr. Hunter was called in. The father and one child slept 
outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation was seen here, 
for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the 
linen of the fever-stricken household, waiting for the wash. The 
rent of H.'s house, Is. a week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 

6 children. One house let for 8d. a-week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 

7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high, the bedroom without window, 
fire-place, door, or opening, except into the lobby; no garden. A 
man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters 
and one grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls 
in the passage. Each of the latter had a child while the family 
was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confine- 
ment and then came home, 



(Jg8 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

(3.) Buckinghamshire 

30 cottages— on 1,000 acres of land— contained here about 
130-140 persons. The parish of Bradenham comprises 1,000 
acres; it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 
males and 54 females. This inequality of the sexes was partly 
remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 fe- 
males; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33 women. Meanwhile, 
the number of houses was one less. 

Winslow. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand 
for houses appears very marked, since very miserable cots let at 
Is. to Is. 3d. per week. 

Water Eaton. Here the landlords, in view of the increas- 
ing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the exist- 
ing nouses. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his 
work, answered the question, whether he could not find a cot 
nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my 
large family." 

Tinker's End, near Winslow. A bedroom in which were 4 
adults and 4 children; 11 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5 inches 
high at its highest part; another 11 feet 3 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 
10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. Each of these families had 
less space than is considered necessary for a convict. No house 
had more than one bedroom, not one of them a back-door; water 
very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. to 2s. In 16 of the houses 
visited, only 1 man that earned 10s. a-week. The quantity 
of air for each person under the circumstances just described 
corresponds to that which he would have if he were shut up in a 
box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. But then, the 
ancient dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional venti- 
lation. 

(4.) Cambridgeshire 

Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. It contains the 
wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. Much straw-plaiting. 
"A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns 
in Gamblingay. The neglect in its centre, becomes mortifica- 
tion at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are 
rotting to pieces. The absentee landlords bleed this poor rook- 
ery too freely. The rents are very high; 8 or £) persons packed in 
one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6 adults, each with 1 or 2 chil- 
dren in one small bedroom, 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 689 



(5 .) Essex 

In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and 
of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. In not less than 
22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevent- 
ed increase of population, or has not brought about that expul- 
sion which, under the name "migration to towns," generally oc- 
curs. In Fingringhoe, a parish of 3,443 acres, were in 1851, 145 
houses; in 1861, only 110. But the people did not wish to go 
away, and managed even to increase under these circumstances. 
In 1851, 252 persons inhabited 61 houses, but in 1861, 262 per- 
sons were squeezed into 49 houses. In Basilden, in 1851, 157 per- 
sons lived on 1,827 acres, in 35 houses; at the end of ten years, 
180 persons in 27 houses. In the parishes of Fingringhoe, South 
Farnbridge, Widford, Basilden, and Ramsden Crags, in 1851, 
1,392 persons were living on 8,449 acres in 316 houses; in 1861, on 
the same area, 1,473 persons in 249 houses. 

(6.) Herefordshire 

This little county has suffered more from the "eviction- 
spirit" than any other in England. At Nadby, over-crowded cot- 
tages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part 
to the farmers. They easily let them for £3 or £4 a-year, and 
paid a weekly wage of 9s. 

(7 .) Huntingdon 

Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cot- 
tages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres; popu- 
lation in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832; and in 1861, 341. 14 cottages, 
each with 1 bedroom, were visited. In one, a married couple, 3 
grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10; 
in another, 3 adults, 6 children. One of these rooms, in which 
8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 
6 feet 9 inches high: the average, without making any deduction 
for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cubic feet 
per head. In the 14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. 
These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of 
the inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. or 12s. per 
rood. These allotments are at a distance from the houses, which 
are without privies. The family "must either go to the allotment 
to deposit their ordures," or, as happens in this place, saving your 



690 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a chest 
of drawers, and drawn out weekly and conveyed to the allotment 
to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In Japan, the cir- 
cle of life-conditions moves more decently than this. 



(8.) Lincolnshire 

Langtoft. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, 
her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen, 
scullery, bedroom over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bed- 
room, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole ground floor, 
21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. The bedroom is a garret; the 
walls run together into the roof like a sugar-loaf, a dormer-win- 
dow opening in front. "Why did he live here? On account of the 
garden? No; it is very small. Rent? High, Is. 3d. per week. 
Near his work? No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 
12 miles. He lived there, because it was a tenantable cot," and 
because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, 
at any price, and in any conditions. The following are the statis- 
tics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms, 38 adults, and 36 
children. 

TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT. 





en 




















B 

o 




a 


(~ 




S 

o 




c 




CO 


CO 


a; 


■O bi 


CO 


00 




0) J 


tl) 








CO, 03 








•a 


73 &lt;o . 


3 




3 












Cft co 


O 


ID 


•o 
&lt;! 


SA 

O 


3 3 


O 

X 


CQ 


&lt; 


X3 
O 


3 ^S 


No. 1. 




3 


5 


8 


No. 7. 




3 


3 


6 


" 2. 




4 


3 


7 


" 8. 




3 


2 


5 


" 3. 




4 


4 


8 


" 9. 




2 





2 


" 4. 




5 


4 


9 


" 10. 




2 


3 


5 


" 5. 




2 


2 


4 


" 11. 




3 


3 


6 


- 6. 




5 


3 


8 


" 12. 




2 


4 


6 



(9.) Kent 

Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diph- 
theria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a medical 
inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. He found that 
in this locality, where much labour is employed, various cots had 
been destroyed and no new ones built. In one district stood four 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 691 

houses, named birdcages; each had 4 rooms of the following di-» 
mensions in feet and inches: 

Kitchen: 9 ft. 5 by 8 ft. 11 by 6 ft. 6. 
Scullery: 8 ft. 6 by 4 ft. 6 by 6 ft. 6. 
Bedroom: 8 ft. 5 by 5 ft. 10 by 6 ft. 3. 
Bedroom: 8 ft. 3 by 8 ft. 4 by 6 ft. 3. 

(10.) Northamptonshire 

Brinworth, Pickford and Floore: in these villages in the 
winter 20-30 men were lounging about the streets from want 
of work. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn 
and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw 
all his farms together into 2 or 3. Hence want of employment. 
Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, on the 
other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing 
glances. Feverishly over-worked in summer, and half-starved in 
winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the 
parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at them." 

At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of 
couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a couple 
with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &amp;c; 
in two houses with two bedrooms, two families of 8 and 9 adults 
respectively. 

(11.) Wiltshire 

Stratton. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. Pen- 
till, in the same parish: a cot let at Is. 3d. weekly with 4 adults 
and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from 
the floor of rough-hewn pieces of stones to the roof of worn-out 
thatch. 

(12.) Worcestershire 

House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 
to 1 '31, the number of inhabitants to each house on the average, 
has risen from 4.2 to 4.6. 

Badsey. Many cots and little gardens here. Some of the farm- 
ers declare that the cots are "a great nuisance here, because 
they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentleman: "The 
poor are none the better for them; if you build 500 they 
will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they 
want" (according to him the houses give birth to the inhabitants, 



692 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). Dr. 
Hunter remarks: "Now these poor must come from somewhere, 
and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Bad- 
sey, it must be repulsion from some other unfit place, which will 
send them here. If each could find an allotment near his work, he 
would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground 
twice as much as the farmer pays for his." 

The continual emigration to the towns, the continual 
formation of surplus-population in the country through the 
concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, 
machinery, &amp;c, and the continual eviction of the agricultural 
population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. 
The more empty the district is of men, the greater is its "relative 
surplus-population," the greater is their pressure on the means 
of employment, the greater is the absolute excess of the agri- 
cultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, 
therefore, in the villages is the local surplus-population and the 
most pestilential packing together of human beings. The pack- 
ing together of knots of men in scattered little villages and small 
country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the 
surface of the land. The continuous superseding of the agricul- 
tural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the in- 
creasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. 
Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their eviction and the 
chief source of their miserable housing which breaks down their 
last power of resistance, and makes them mere slaves of the land- 
ed proprietors and the farmers. 1 Thus the minimum of wages 
becomes a law of Nature to them. On the other hand, the land, in 
spite of its constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same 
time under-populated. This is seen, not only locally at the points 
where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making, &amp;c, 
is most marked. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as 

1 "The heaven-born employment of the hind gives dignity even to his 
position. He is not a slave, but a soldier of peace, and deserves his place in 
married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a 
power of enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. 
He no more receives market-price for his work than does the soldier. Like 
the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and 
his own locality. Early marriage and the operation of the various laws of 
settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act affect the other." 
(Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.) Sometimes an exceptionally soft-hearted land- 
lord relents at the solitude he has created. "It is a melancholy thing to stand 
alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the com- 
pletion of Hookham. "1 look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. 
I am the giant of Giant Castle, and have eat up all my neighbours." 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 693 

well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring 
times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants 
extra hands. There are always too many agricultural labourers 
for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or tem- 
porary needs of the cultivation of the soil. 1 Hence we find in the 
official documents contradictory complaints from the same places 
of deficiency and excess of labour simultaneously. The tempo- 
rary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but 
a forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploi- 
tation at an age constantly lowered. As soon as the exploitation 
of the women and children takes place on a larger scale it be- 
comes in turn a new means of making a surplus-population of the 
male agricultural labourer and of keeping down his wage. In the 
east of England thrives a beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — 
the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here. 2 
The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties 
of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Not- 
tingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of North- 
ampton, Bedford, and Rutland. Lincolnshire will serve us as 
an example. A large part of this county is new land, marsh for- 
merly, or even, as in others of the eastern counties just named, 
won lately from the sea. The steam-engine has worked wonders 
in the way of drainage. What were once fens and sandbanks, bear 
now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. The same 
thing holds of the alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in 
the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the 

1 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in 
proportion as capitalist production there takes possession of agriculture, it 
drives the "surplus" agricultural population into the towns. Here also we 
find deterioration in the housing and other conditions at the source of the 
surplus-population. On the special "proletariat foncier," to which this system 
of parcelling out the land has given rise, see among others, the work of Col- 
ins, already quoted, and Karl Marx "Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis 
Bonaparte." 2nd edition. Hamburg, 1869, pp. 56, &amp;c. In 1846, the town popu- 
lation in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 
1861, the town by 28.86, the agricultural by 71.14 per cent. During the last 
5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population has 
been yet more marked. As early as 1846. Pierre Dupont in his "Ouvriers" 
sang: 

Mai vetus, loges dans des trous, 
Sous les combles, dans les decombres, 
Nous vivons avec les hiboux 
Et les larrons, amis des ombres. 

2 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission,'* 
published at the end of March, 1867. It deals solely with the agricultural 
gang-system. 



g94 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Trent. In proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new 
cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of la- 
bour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads 
that wound along the sides of the hills. There alone had the popu- 
lation formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the 
winter-time. The labourers that dwell on the farms of 400-1,000 
acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed 
on such kinds of agricultural work as is permanent, difficult, and 
carried on by aid of horses. For every 100 acres there is, on an 
average, scarcely one cottage. A fen farmer, e.g., gave evidence 
before the Commission of Inquiry: "I farm 320 acres, all arable 
land. I have not one cottage on my farm. I have only one la- 
bourer on my farm now. I have four horsemen lodging about. We 
get light work done by gangs." 1 The soil requires much light 
field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain processes of manur- 
ing, removing of stones, &amp;c. This is done by the gangs, or organ- 
ised bands that dwell in the open villages. 

The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young 
persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the boys are 
for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children 
of both sexes (6-13 years of age). At the head is the gang-master, 
always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is 
called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady, drunken, but with a dash 
of enterprise and savoir faire. He is the recruiting- sergeant 
for the gang, which works under him, not under the farmer. He gen- 
erally arranges with the latter for piece-work, and his income, 
which on the average is not very much above that of an ordinary 
agricultural labourer, 2 depends almost entirely upon the dex- 
terity with which he manages to extract within the shortest time 
the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. The farmers 
have discovered that women work steadily only under the direc- 
tion of men, but that women and children, once set going, im- 
petuously spend their life-force— as Fourier knew — while the 
adult male labourer is shrewd enough to economise his as much 
as he can. The gang-master goes from one farm to another, and 
thus employs his gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. Employ- 
ment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more cer- 
tain for the labouring families, than employment by the individ- 
ual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. This cir- 
cumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages 

1 "Child. Emp. Comm., VI. Report." Evidence 173, p. 37. 

2 Some gang-masters, however, have worked themselves up to the posi- 
tion of farmers of 500 acres, or proprietors of whole rows of houses. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 695 

that children are generally only to be hired through his instru- 
mentality. The lending out of these individually, independent- 
ly of the gang, is his second trade. 

The "drawbacks" of the system are the over- work of the chil- 
dren and young persons, the enormous marches that they make 
daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, 
finally, the demoralisation of the gang. Although the gang-master, 
who, in some districts is called "the driver," is armed with a long 
stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment 
are exceptional. He is a democratic emperor, or a kind of Pied 
Piper of Hamelin. He must therefore be popular with his sub- 
jects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy 
life under his direction. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and ob- 
scenest impudence give attractions to the gang. Generally the gang- 
master pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the 
head of the procession reeling drunk, propped up right and left 
by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring 
up the rear, boisterous, and singing chaffing and bawdy songs. 
On the return journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie," is the 
order of the day. The getting with child of girls of 13 and 44 by 
their male companions of the same age, is common. The open vil- 
lages which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms 
and Gomorrahs, 1 and have twice as high a rate of illegitimate 
births as the rest of the kingdom. The moral character of girls 
bred in these schools, when married women, was shown above. 
Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, 
are born recruits of the gang. 

The gang in its classical form just described, is called the 
public, common, or tramping gang. For there are also private 
gangs. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, 
but count fewer members, and work, not under a gang-master, but 
under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know 
how to employ in any better way. The gipsy fun has vanished 
here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment 
of the children is worse. 

The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily 
increased, 2 clearly does not exist for the sake of the gang-master. 



1 "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs). 
1. c, p. 6, § 32. 

2 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. In some places they 
are said to have been introduced at comparatively late dates; in others where 
gangs .... have been known for many years .... more and younger children 
are employed in them." (1. c, p. 79, § 174). 



696 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



It exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, 1 and indirectly 
of the landlords. 2 For the farmer there is no more ingenious 
method of keeping his labourers well below the normal level, and 
yet of always having an extra hand ready for extra work, of ex- 
tracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least 
possible amount of money, 3 and of making adult male labour 
"redundant." From the exposition already made, it will be under- 
stood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment 
for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while on the other, the 
gang-system is at the same time declared "necessary" on account 
of the want of adult male labour and its migration to the towns. 4 
The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of 
Lincolnshire, are pole and counterpole of capitalistic production. 5 



1 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on 
land which affords rent of from 40 to 50 shillings, that women and children 
are employed in the greatest numbers." (1. c, pp. 17, 14.) 

2 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he 
indignantly declared to the Commission of Inquiry that the whole hubbub 
was only due to the name of the system. If instead of "gang" it were called "the 
Agricultural Juvenile Industrial Self-supporting Association," everything 
would be all right. 

3 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are em- 
ployed," says a former gang-master (1. c, p. 17, § 14). "The gang-system is 
decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the chil- 
dren," says a farmer. (1. c, p. 16, § 3.) 

4 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used 
to be done by men and women. More men are out of work now where chil- 
dren and women are employed than formerly." (1. c, p. 43, n. 202.) On the oth- 
er hand, "the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the 
arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of emigration, and the facili- 
ty afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I (the "I" is the steward 
of a great lord) think the services of children are most indispensable." (1. c, 
p. 80, n. 180.) For the "labour question" in English agricultural districts, 
differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farm- 
ers' question, viz., how it is possible, despite an always increasing exodus 
of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative surplus-population 
in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer 
at a minimum? 

5 The "Public Health Report," where in dealing with the subject of 
children's mortality, the gang-system is treated in passing, remains un- 
known to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. On the other 
hand, the last report of the "Child. Empl. Cornm." afforded the press sen- 
sational copy always welcome. Whilst the Liberal press asked how the 
fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of the State Church, with 
whom Lincolnshire swarms, could allow such a system to arise on their es- 
tates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to the 
Antipodes, "for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders" — the 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 697 



(f.) Ireland 

In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to 
Ireland. First, the main facts of the case. 

The population of Ireland had, in 1841, reached 8,222,664; 
in 1851, it had dwindled to 6,623,985; in 1861, to 5,850,309; in 1866, 

to 5y millions, nearly to its level in 1801. The diminution began 

with the famine year, 1846, so that Ireland, in less than twenty 

5 
years, lost more than nrths of its people. 1 Its total emigration 

from May, 1851, to July, 1865, numbered 1,591,487: the emigra- 
tion during the years 1861-1865 was more than half-a-million. 
The number of inhabited houses fell, from 1851-1861, by 52,990. 
From 1851-1861, the number of holdings of 15 to 30 acres increased 
61,000, that of holdings over 30 acres, 109,000, whilst the total 
number of all farms fell 120,000, a fall, therefore, solely due to 
the suppression of farms under 15 acres— i.e., to their cen- 
tralisation. 



more refined press confined itself to reflections on the coarse degradation of 
the agricultural population who are capable of selling their children into 
such slavery! Under the accursed conditions to which these "delicate" people 
condemn the agricultural labourer, it would not be surprising if he ate his 
own children. What is really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, 
he has, in great part, retained. The official reports prove that the parents, 
even in the gang districts, loathe the gang-system. "There is much in the evi- 
dence that shows that the parents of the children would, in many instances, 
be glad to be aided by the requirements of a legal obligation, to resist the pres- 
sure and the temptations to which they are often subject. They are liable to 
be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, under 
threats of being themselves discharged, to be taken to work at an age when ... 

school attendance... would be manifestly to their greater advantage All that 

time and strength wasted; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable fatigue 
produced to the labourer and to his children; every instance in which the par- 
ent may have traced the moral ruin of his child to the undermining of deli- 
cacy by the over-crowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of 
the public gang, must have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds 
of the labouring poor which can be well understood, and which it would be 
needless to particularise. They must be conscious that much bodily and men- 
tal pain has thus been inflicted upon them from causes for which they were in 
no way answerable; to which, had it been in their power, they would have in 
no way consented; and against which they were powerless to struggle." (1. c, 
p. xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. 96.) 

1 Population of Ireland, 1801, 5,319,867 persons; 1811, 6,084,996; 
1821, 6,869,544; 1831, 7,828,347; 1841, 8,222,664. 



698 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Table A 



LIVE STOCK 



Year 


Horses 


Cattle 


Total 
Number 


Decrease 


Total 
Number 


Decrease 


Increase 


1860 
1861 
1862 
1863 
1864 
1865- 


619,811 
614,232 
602,894 
579,978 
562,158 
547,867 


5,993 
11,338 
22,916 
17,820 
14,291 


3,606,374 
3,471,688 
3,254,890 
3,144,231 
3,262,294 
3,493,414 


138,316 
216,798 
110,695 


118,063 
231,120 



Year 


Sheep 


Pigs 


Total 
Number 


Decrease 


Increase 


Total 
Number 


Decrease 


Increase 


1860 
1861 
1862 
1863 
1864 
1865 


3,542,080 
3,556,050 
3,456,132 
3,308,204 
3,366,941 
3,688,742 


99,918 
147,982 


13,970 

58,737 
321,801 


1,271,072 
1,102,042 
1,154,324 
1,067,458 
1,058,480 
1,299,893 


169,030 

86,866 
8,978 


52,282 
241,413 



The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied 
by a decrease in the mass of products. For our purpose, it suf- 
fices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which over 
half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute 'number of people 
sank by more than l \ s of a million. 

From the above table it results:-^ 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 



699 





Horses 


Cattle 


Sheep 


Pigs 


Absolute Decrease 


Absolute Decrease 


Absolute Increase 


Absolute Increase 


72,358 


116,626 


146,608 


28.819 1 



Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of 
subsistence for cattle and for men. In the following table is cal- 
culated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as com- 
pared with its immediate predecessor. The Cereal Crops include 
wheaX, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, pota- 
toes, turnips, mangolds, beet-root, cabbages, carrots, parsnips, 
vetches, &amp;c. 

Table B 



INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE 


AREA UNDER CROPS 


AND GRASS 


IN ACREAGE 




Cereal 


Green Crops 


Grass and 


Flax 


Total Culti- 


Year 


Crops 


Clover 




vated Land 






















De- 


De- 


In- 


De- 


In- 


De- 


In- 


De- 


In- 




crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 


crease 




Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


Acres 


1861 


15,701 


36,974 




47,969 






19,271 


81,873 




1862 


72,734 


74,785 






6,623 




2,055 


138,841 




1863 


144,719 


19,358 






7,724 




63,922 


92,431 




1864 


122,437 


2,317 






47,486 




87,761 




10,493 


1865 


72,450 




25,241 




68,970 


50,159 




28,218 




1861- 


428,041 


107,984 






82,834 




122,850 


330,860 




65 





















In the year 1865, 127,470 additional acres came under the 
heading "grass land," chiefly because the area under the head- 
ing of "bog and waste unoccupied," decreased by 101,543 acres. 
If we compare 1865 with 1864, there is a decrease in cereals of 
246,667 qrs., of which 48,999 were wheat, 160,605 oats, 29,892 
barley, &amp;c: the decrease in potatoes was 446,398 tons, although 
the area of their cultivation increased in 1865. 



1 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further 
back. Thus: Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but in 1856, 3,694,294. Pigs in 1865. 
1,299,893, but in 1858, 1,409,883. 



700 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION, PRODUCT 









Increase or 




Product 


Acres of Cultivated 
Land 


Decrease, 
1865 


Product per Acre 
















1864 


1865 






1864 




Wheat, 


276,483 


266,989 




9,494 


Wheat, cwt., 13.3 




Oats 


1,814,886 


1,745,228 




69,658 


Oats, . 12.1 




Barley, 


172,700 


177,102 


4,402 




Barley . 15.9 




Bere 1 

Rye J 


8,894 


10,091 


1,197 




i Bere, . 18.4 
I Rye, . • 8.6 














Potatoes, . . &lt; . 


1,039,724 


1,066,260 


26,536 




Potatoes, tons, 4.1 




Turnips, . . . . 


337,355 


334,212 




3,143 


Turnips, . 10.3 




Mangold-wurzel, 


14,073 


14,839 


316 




Mangold-wurzel, 10.5 




Cabbages, . . . 


31,821 


33,622 


1,801 




Cabbages, 9.3 




Flax, 


301,693 


251,433 




50.260 


Flax, st. (14 lb) 34.2 




Hay, 


1,609,569 


1,678,493 


68,924 




Hay, tons, . . . .1.6 





From the movement of population and the agricultural prod- 
uce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its land- 
lords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists. It is reflected 
in the rise and fall of the Income-tax. It may be remembered that 
Schedule D (profits with the exception of those of farmers), in- 
cludes also the so-called, "professional" profits— i.e., the incomes 
of lawyers, doctors, &amp;c; and the Schedules C. and E., in 
which no special details are given, include the incomes of employ- 
es, officers, State sinecurists&gt; State fundholders, &amp;c. 



THE INCOME-TAX ON THE SUBJOINED 





1860 


18*61 




Schedule A. 
Rent of Land 


13,893,829 

2,765,387 

4,891,652 
22,962,885 


13,003,554 

2,773,644 

4,836,203 
32,998,394 




Schedule B. 
Farmers' Profits 




Schedule D. 
Industrial, &amp;c, Profits 




Total Schedules A. to E 









THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 



701 



PER ACRE, AND TOTAL PRODUCT OF 1865 COMPARED WITH 1864 



Table C 



1865 



Increase 

or Decrease, 

1865 



Total Product 



1864 



1865 



Increase or Decrease, 
1865 



13.0 




0.3 


12.3 


0.2 




14.9 




1.0 


14.8 




1.6 


10.4 


1.9 




3.6 




0.5 


9.9 




0.4 


13.3 


2.8 




10.4 


1.1 




25.2 




9.0 


1.8 


0.2 





Qrs. 
875,782 . 

7,826,332 . 

761,909 . 

15,160 . 

12,680 . 

4,312,388 ts. 

3,467,659 . 

147,284 . 

297,375 . 

64,506 st. 

2,607,153 ts. 



Qrs. 

826,783 . 

7,659,727 . 
732,017 . 
13,989 . 
18,364 . 
3,865,990 ts. 
3,301,683 . 
191,937 . 
350,252 . 
39,561 St. 
3,068,707 ts. 



4 qs. 



44,653 ts. 
52,877 . 

461,554 . 



446 
165 



999 qs. 
605 . 
892 . 
171 . 

398 ts 

,976 . 



24,945 St. 



1 The data of the text are put together from the materials of the "Agri- 
cultural Statistics, Trelaud, General Abstracts, Dublin," for the years 1860, 
et seq., and "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland. Tables showing the estimated 
average produce, &amp;c, Dublin, 1866." These statistics are official, an! laid 
before Parliament annually. [Note to 2nd edition. The official statistics for 
the year 1872 show, as compared with 1871, a decrease in area under culti- 
vation of 134,915 acres. An increase occurred in the cultivation of green crops, 
turnips, mangold-wurzel, and the like; a decrease in the area under cultiva- 
tion for wheat of 16,000 acres; oats, 14,000; barley and rye, 4,000; potatoes, 
66,632; flax, 34,667; grass, clover, vetches, rape-seed, 30,000. The soil under 
cultivation for wheat shows for the last 5 years the following stages of de- 
crease:-1868, 285,000 acres; 1869, 280,000; 1870, 259,000; 1871, 244,(XX); 
1872 228,000. For 1872 we find, in round numbers, an increase of 2,b00 
horses, 80,000 horned cattle, 68,609 sheep, and a decrease of 236,000 pigs.] 

Table D 
INCOMES IN POUNDS STERLING 





1862 


1863 


1864 


1865 




13,398,938 

2,937,899 

4,858,800 
23,597,574 


13,494,091 

2,938,823 

4,846,497 
23,658,631 


13,470,700 

2,930,874 

4,546,147 
23,236,298 


13,801,616 

2,946,072 

4,850,199 
23,930,340' 



1 Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue. Lond. 1866. 



702 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Under Schedule D. the average annual increase of income 
from 1853-1864 was only 0.93; whilst, in the same period, in 
Great Britain, it was 4.58. The following table shows the dis- 
tribution of the profits (with the exception of those of farmers) 
for the years 1864 and 1865: — 

Table E 
SCHEDULE D. INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND 





1864 
£. 


1865 
£. 


Total yearly income 
f 


4,368,610 divided among 
17,467 persons. 


4,669,979 divided 
among 18,081 persons. 




Yearly income over 
£60 and under 
£100 


238,626 5,015 , 


222,575 4,703 m 


Of the yearly total 
income 


1,979,066 „ 11,321 ,. 


2,028,471 „ 12,184 „ 


Remainder of the to- 
tal yearly income 


2,150,818,, 1,131 


2,418,933,, 1,194 „ 




r 


1,083,906 „ 910 ,. 


1,097,937 „ 1,044 „ 






1,066,912,, 121 „ 


1,320,996,, 186 ., 


Of these . . . .&lt; 




430,535 „ 105 „ 


584,458 m 122 u 






646,377 „ 26 „ 


736,448 „ 28 „ 






262,610 „ 3 „ 


264,528 „ 3 1 „ 



England, a country with fully developed capitalist produc- 
tion, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death 
with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. But 
Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of England, 

1 The total yearly income under Schedule D. is different in this table 
from that which appears in the preceding ones, because of certain deductions 
allowed by law. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 703 

marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields 
corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military recruits. 

The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land 
out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the 
soil, 1 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breed- 
ing, has brought about, in some of its branches, an absolute 
diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, 
and constantly interrupted by retrogressions. Nevertheless, with the 
fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers' profits rose, 
although the latter not as steadily as the former. The reason of 
this is easily comprehensible. On the one hand, with the throw- 
ing of small holdings into large ones, and the change of arable 
into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was trans- 
formed into surplus-produce. The surplus-produce increased, al- 
though the total produce, of which it formed a fraction, decreased. 
On the other hand, the money-value of this surplus-produce 
increased yet more rapidly than its mass, in consequence of the 
rise in the English market-price of meat, wool, &amp;c, during the 
last 20, and especially during the last 10, years. 

The scattered means of production that serve the producers 
themselves as means of employment and of subsistence, without 
expanding their own value by the incorporation of the labour 
of others, are no more capital than a product consumed by 
its own producer is a commodity. If, with the mass of the popu- 
lation, that of the means of production employed in agri- 
culture also diminished, the mass of the capital employed in 
agriculture increased, because a part of the means of production 
that were formerly scattered, was concentrated and turned into 
capital. 

The total capital of Ireland outside agriculture, employed in 
industry and trade, accumulated during the last two decades 
slowly, and with great and constantly recurring fluctuations; so 
much the more rapidly did the concentration of its individual 
constituents develop. And, however small its absolute increase, 
in proportion to the dwindling population it had increased 
largely. 

Here, then, under our own eyes and on a large scale, a proc- 
ess is revealed, than which nothing more excellent could be 
wished for by orthodox economy for the support of its dogma: that 



1 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be for- 
gotten that for a century and a half England has indirectly exported the soil 
of Ireland, without as much as allowing its cultivators the means for making 
up the constituents of the soil that had been exhausted. 



704 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

misery springs from absolute surplus-population, and that equi- 
librium is re-established by depopulation. This is a far more im- 
portant experiment than was the plague in the middle of the 14th 
century so belauded of Malthusians. Note further: If only the nai- 
vete of the schoolmaster could apply, to the conditions of produc- 
tion and population of the nineteenth century, the standard of 
the 14th, this naivete, into the bargain, overlooked the fact that 
whilst, after the plague and the decimation that accompanied it, 
followed on this side of the Channel, in England, enfranchisement 
and enrichment of the agricultural population, on that side, in 
France, followed greater servitude and more misery. * 

The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, 
but it killed poor devils only. To the wealth of the country it 
did not the slightest damage. The exodus of the next 20 years, 
an exodus still constantly increasing, did not, as, e.g., the Thir- 
ty Years' War, decimate, along with the human beings, their 
means of production. Irish genius discovered an altogether new 
way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the 
scene of its misery. The exiles transplanted to the United States, 
send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for 
those left behind. Every troop that emigrates one year, draws an- 
other after it the next. Thus, instead of costing Ireland anything, 
emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export 
trade. Finally, it is a systematic process, which does not simply 
make a passing gap in the population, but sucks out of it every 
year more people than are replaced by the births, so that the ab- 
solute level of the population falls year by year. 2 

What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind 
and freed from the surplus-population? That the relative sur- 
plus-population is to-day as great as before 1846; that wages are 
just as low, that the oppression of the labourers has increased, that 
misery is forcing the country towards a new crisis. The facts are 
simple The revolution in agriculture has kept pace with emig- 
ration. The production of relative surplus-population has more 
than kept pace with the absolute depopulation. A glance at table 



1 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of popu- 
lation," Th. Sadler, before the publication of his work on population, issued 
his famous book, "Ireland, its Evils and their Remedies." 2nd edition, London, 
1829. Here, by comparison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and 
of the individual counties in each province, he proves that the misery there 
is not, as Malthus would have it, in proportion to the number of the popula- 
tion, but in inverse ratio to this. 

2 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 
2,325,922. 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 705 

C shows that the change of arable to pasture land must work yet 
more acutely in Ireland than in England. In England the culti- 
vation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in 
Ireland, it decreases. Whilst a large number of acres, that were for- 
merly tilled, lie idle or are turned permanently into grass-land, 
a great part of the waste land and peat bogs that were unused for- 
merly, become of service for the extension of cattle-breeding. The 
smaller and medium farmers— I reckon among these all who 

Q 

do not cultivate more than 100 acres — still make up about TTjths 

of the whole number. J They are, one after the other, and with 
a degree of force unknown before, crushed by the competition of 
an agriculture managed by capital, and therefore they continual- 
ly furnish new recruits to the class of wage-labourers. The one great 
industry of Ireland, linen-manufacture, requires relatively few 
adult men and only employs altogether, in spite of its expansion 
since the price of cotton rose in 1861-1866, a comparatively in- 
significant part of the population. Like all other great modern 
industries, it constantly produces, by incessant fluctuations, a 
relative surplus-population within its own sphere, even with an 
absolute increase in the mass of human beings absorbed by it. 
The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for 
gigantic shirt-factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the 
most part, scattered over the country. Here, we encounter again 
the system described above of domestic industry, which in under- 
payment and over-work, possesses its own systematic means for 
creating supernumerary labourers. Finally, although the depopu- 
lation has not such destructive consequences as would result in a 
country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not 
go on without constant reaction upon the home-market. The gap 
which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand 
for labour, but also the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, 
tradespeople generally. Hence the diminution in incomes between 
£60 and £100 in Table E. 

A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labour- 
ers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor 
Law Inspectors (1870). 2 Officials of a government which is main- 



1 According to a table in Murphy's "Ireland Industrial, Political and 
Social," 1870, 94.6 per cent, of the holdings do not reach 100 acres, 5.4 
exceed 100 acres. 

2 "Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the Wages of Agricultural 
Labourers in Dublin," 1870. See also "Agricultural Labourers (Ireland). Re- 
turn, etc." 8 March, 1861, London, 1862. 



706 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



tainedonly by bayonets and by a state of siege, now open, now dis- 
guised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that 
their colleagues in England disdain. In spite of this, however, 
they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions. Accord- 
ing to them the rate of wages in the country, still very low,* has 
within the last 20 years risen 50-60 per cent., and stands now, on 
the average, at 6s. to 9s. per week. But behind this apparent rise, 
is hidden an actual fall in wages, for it does not correspond at all 
to the rise in price of the necessary means of subsistence that has 
taken place in the meantime. For proof, the following extract from 
the official accounts of an Irish workhouse. 

AVERAGE WEEKLY COST PER HEAD 



Year ended. 


Provisions and 
Necessaries. 


Clothing 


Total. 


29th Sept., 1849. 
1869. 


Is. 3-U. 
4 

2s. 7-j-d. 
4 


3d. 
6d. 


Is 6-J-d. 

4 

3s. lj-d. 
4 



The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully 
twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as they 
were 20 years before. 

Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of 
the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far from 
accurate. Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages 
were paid in kind, only the smallest part in money; to-day, pay- 
ment in money is the rule. From this it follows that, whatever 
the amount of the real wage, its money rate must rise. "Previous 
to the famine, the labourer enjoyed his cabin .... with a rood, 
or half-acre or acre of land, and facilities for . . .a crop of pota- 
toes. He was able to rear his pig and keep fowl . . . But they now 
have to buy bread, and they have no refuse upon which they can 
feed a pig or fowl, and they have consequently no benefit from the 
sale of a pig, fowl, or eggs." 1 In fact, formerly, the agricultural 
labourers were but the smallest of the small farmers, and formed for 
the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms 
on which they found employment. Only since the catastrophe of 1846 



1 1. c, pp. 29, 1, 



THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 707 

have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely wage- 
labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only 
by monetary relations. 

We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846. 
Since then they have grown yet worse. A part of the agricultural 
labourers which, however, grows less day by day, dwells still 
on the holdings of the farmers in over-crowded huts, whose hideous- 
ness far surpasses the worst that the English agricultural labourers 
offered us in this way. And this holds generally with the exception 
of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork, 
Limerick, Kilkenny, &amp;c; in the east, in Wicklow, Wexford, &amp;c; 
in the centre of Ireland, in King's and Queen's County, Dublin, 
&amp;c; in the west, in Sligo, Roscommon, Mayo, Galway, &amp;c. "The 
agricultural labourers' huts," an inspector cries out, "are a disgrace 
to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country." 1 In 
order to increase the attractions of these holes for the labourers, 
the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are 
systematically confiscated. "The mere sense that they exist subject 
to this species of ban, on the part of the landlords and their agents, 
has . . . given birth in the minds of the labourers to corresponding 
sentiments of antagonism and dissatisfaction towards those by 
whom they are thus led to regard themselves as being treated 
as ... a proscribed race." 2 

The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away 
the huts situated on the field of labour. This was done on the larg- 
est scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high. Thus 
many labourers were compelled to seek shelter in villages and 
towns. There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cel- 
lars and corners, in the worst back slums. Thousands of Irish fam- 
ilies, who according to the testimony of the English, eaten up 
as these are with national prejudice, are notable for their rare at- 
tachment to the domestic hearth, for their gaiety and the purity 
of their home-life, found themselves suddenly transplanted into 
hotbeds of vice. The men are now obliged to seek work of the 
neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore 
under the most precarious form of wage. Hence "they sometimes 
have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and 
suffer much hardship, not unfrequently ending in sickness, disease 
and want." 3 



1 1. c, p. 12. 
• I. c, p. 12. 
8 1. c, p. 25 



708 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



"The towns have had to receive from year to year what was 
deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division; 1 and then 
people still wonder "there is still a surplus of labour in the towns 
and villages, and either a scarcity or a threatened scarcity 
in some of the country divisions." 2 The truth is that this want 
only becomes perceptible "in harvest-time, or during spring, 
or at such times as agricultural operations are carried on with 
astivity; at other periods of the year many hands are idle;" 3 that 
"from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes in October until 
the early spring following . . . there is no employment for 
them;" 4 and further, that during the active times they "are subject 
to broken days and to all kinds of interruptions." 5 

These results of the agricultural revolution— i.e., the change 
of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the most rigo- 
rous economy of labour, &amp;c, are still further aggravated by the 
model landlords, who, instead of spending their rents in other 
countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. In 
order that the law of supply and demand may not be broken, these 
gentlemen draw their "labour-supply . . . chiefly from their small 
tenants, who are obliged to attend when required to do the land- 
lord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, considerably 
under the current rates paid to ordinary labourers, and without 
regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant of being obliged 
to neglect his own business at critical periods of sowing or reaping." 6 

The uncertainty and irregularity of employment, the constant 
return and long duration of gluts of labour, all these symptoms 
of a relative surplus-population, figure therefore in the reports 
of the Poor Law administration, as so many hardships of the agri- 
cultural proletariat. It will be remembered that we met, in the 
English agricultural proletariat, with a similar spectacle. But the 
difference is that in England, an industrial country, the indus- 
trial reserve recruits itself from the country districts, whilst in 
Ireland, an agricultural country, the agricultural reserve recruits 
itself from the towns, the cities of refuge of the expelled agricul- 
tural labourers. In the former, the supernumeraries of agriculture 
are transformed into factory operatives; in the latter, those forced 
into the towns, whilst at the same time they press on the wages 



1 I. 


c. 


. p- 


27. 




2 I. 


c. 


. p- 


25. 




3 I. 


c. 


- p- 


i. 




4 1. 


c. 


1 pp 


31, 


32. 


6 1. 


c, 


p 


-•i. 




8 1. 


c, 


p ; 


50. 





THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 709 

in towns, remain agricultural labourers, and are constantly sent 
back to the country districts in search of work. 

The official inspectors sum up the material condition of the 
agricultural labourer as follows: "Though living with the strictest 
frugality, his own wages are barely sufficient to provide food for 
an ordinary family and pay his rent, and he depends upon other 
sources for the means of clothing himself, his wife, and children. . . 
The atmosphere of these cabins, combined with the other priva- 
tions they are subjected to, has made this class particularly sus- 
ceptible to low fever and pulmonary consumption." 1 After this, 
it is no wonder that, according to the unanimous testimony of 
the inspectors, a sombre discontent runs through the ranks of this 
class, that they long for the return of the past, loathe the present, 
despair of the future, give themselves up "to the evil influence of 
agitators," and have only one fixed idea, to emigrate to America. 
This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian 
panacea, depopulation, has transformed green Erin. 

What a happy life the Irish factory operative leads, one exam- 
ple will show: "On my recent visit to the North of Ireland," says the 
English Factory Inspector, Robert Baker, "I met with the follow- 
ing evidence of effort in an Irish skilled workman to afford edu- 
cation to his children; and I give his evidence verbatim, as I took 
it from his mouth. That he was a skilled factory hand, may be 
understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Man- 
chester market. 'Johnson. — I am a beetler and work from 6 in 
the morning till 11 at night, from Monday to Friday. Saturday we 
leave off at 6 p. m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). 
I have five children in all. For this work I get 10s. 6d. a week; 
my wife works here also, and gets 5s. a week. The oldest girl who 
is 12, minds the house. She is also cook, and all the servant we 
have. She gets the young ones ready for school. A girl going past 
the house wakes me at half past five in the morning. My wife gets 
up and goes along with me. We get nothing (to eat) before we come 
to work. The child of 12 takes care of the little children all the 
day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight. At eight we go 
home. We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, 
sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal, as we are able 
to get it. In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indi- 
an meal. In the summer we get a few potatoes, planting a small 
patch ourselves; and when they are done we get back to stirabout. 
Sometimes we get a little milk as it may be. So we go on from day to 



1. c, pp. 21, 13 



710 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round. I 
am always very much tired when I have done at night. We may 
see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom. Three of our 
children attend school, for whom we pay Id. a week a head. Our 
rent is 9d. a week. Peat for firing costs Is, 6d. a fortnight at the 
very lowest.'" 1 Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life! 

In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in 
England. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867, one of the 
Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solution in The 
Times. "Wie menschlich von solch grossem Herrn!" 

From Table E we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of 
total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only £262,610; 
that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total profits, the same 
three virtuosi of "abstinence" pocketed £274,448; in 1864, 26 
surplus-value makers reached to £646,377; in 1865, 28 surplus- 
value makers reached to £736,448; in 1864, 121 surplus-value mak- 
ers, £1,066,912; in 1865, 186 surplus-value makers, £1,320,996; 
in 1864, 1,131 surplus-value makers £2,150,818, nearly half of the 
total annual proflt;in 1865, 1,194 surplus-value makers, £2,418,933, 
more than half of the. total annual profit. But the lion's share, 
which an inconceivably small number of land magnates in England, 
Scotland and Ireland swallow up of the yearly national rental, 
is so monstrous that the wisdom of the English State does not think 
fit to afford the same statistical materials about the distribution 
of rents as about the distribution of profits. Lord Dufferin is one 
of those land magnates. That rent-rolls and profits can ever be 
"excessive," or that their plethora is in any way connected with 
plethora of the people's misery is, of course, an idea as "disrepu- 
table" as "unsound." He keeps to facts. The fact is that, as the 
Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls swell; that depop^ 
ulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, 
therefore, the people, that mere accessory of the soil. He declares, 
therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of 
emigration still flows too lazily. To be perfectly happy, Ireland 
must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men. 
Let no man imagine that this lord, poetic into the bargain, is a 
physician of the school of Sangrado, who as often as he did not find 
his patient better, ordered phlebotomy and again phlebotomy, until 
the patient lost his sickness at the same time as his blood. Lord 
Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, 
instead of about two millions; in fact, without the getting rid of 
these, the millennium in Erin is not to be. The proof is easily given, 

i "Rept. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 96. 



THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 



711 



NUMBER AND EXTENT OF FARMS IN IRELAND IN 1864 



(1) Farms not 
over 1 acre. 



(2) Farms over 1, 
not over 5 acres. 



(3) Farms over 5, 
not over 15 acres. 



(4) Farms over 1 5, 
not over 30 acres. 



No. 
48,653 



Acres. 
25,394 



No. 

52,037 



Acres. 
288,916 



No. 
176,368 



Acres. 
1,836,310 



No. 
136,578 



Acres. 
3,051,343 



(5) Farms over 30, 
not over 50 acre3. 


(6) Farms over 50, 
not over 100 acres. 


(7) Farms over 
100 acres. 


(8) Total 
area. 


No. 
71,961 


Acres. 
2,906,274 


No. 
54,247 


Acres. 
3,983,880 


No. 
31,927 


Acres. 
8,227,807 


Acres. 
26,319,924* 



Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally 
farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15 acres. 
These above all must disappear. This gives 307,058 "supernu- 
merary" farmers, and reckoning the families the low average 
of 4 persons, 1,228,232 persons. On the extravagant supposition 
that, after the agricultural revolution is complete one-fourth 
of these are again absorbable, there remain for emigration 921,174 
persons. Categories 4,5, 6, of over 15 and not over 100 acres, are, 
as was known long since in England, too small for capitalistic 
cultivation of corn, and for sheep-breeding are almost vanishing 
quantities. On the same supposition as before, therefore, there are 
further 788,761 persons to emigrate; total, 1,709,532. And as 
i'appetit vient en mangeant, Rentroll's eyes will soon discover 

that Ireland, with 3y millions, is still always miserable, and mis- 
erable because she is over-populated. Therefore her depopulation 
must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that 
of an English sheep-walk and cattle-pasture. 2 



1 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land. 

2 How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the 
most of, both by the individual landlords and by the Engish legislature, to 
forcibly carry out the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of 
Ireland down to the proportion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show 
more fully in Vol. III. of this work, in the section on landed property. There 
also I return to the condition of the small farmers and the agricultural labour- 
ers. At present, only one quotation. Nassau W. Senior says, with other things, 



712 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method 
has its drawbacks. With the accumulation of rents in Ireland, 
the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace. The Irish- 
man, banished by sheep and ox, re-appears on the other side of 
the ocean as a Fenian, and face to face with the old queen of the 
seas rises, threatening and more threatening, the young giant 
Republic: 

Acerba fata Romanos agunt 
Scelusque fraternae necis. 



in his posthumous work, "Journals, Conversations and Essays relating to 
Ireland." 2 vols. London 1868; Vol. II., p. 282. "Well," said Dr. G., "we have 
got our Poor Law and it is a great instrument for giving the victory to the 
landlords. Another, and a still more powerful instrument is emigration. ... 
No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the landlords 
and the small Celtic farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of 
the tenants. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland becomes a grazing coun- 
try, with the comparatively thin population which a grazing country re- 
quires, the better for all classes." The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ire- 
land the monopoly of the free importation of corn into Great Britain. They 
favoured artificially, therefore, the cultivation of corn. With the abolition of 
the Corn Laws in 1846, this monopoly was suddenly removed. Apart from all 
other circumstances, this event alone was sufficient to give a great impulse 
to the turning of Irish arable into pasture land, to the concentration of farms, 
and to the eviction of small cultivators. After the fruitfulness of the Irish soil 
had been praised from 1815 to 1846, and proclaimed loudly as by Nature 
herself destined for the cultivation of wheat, English agronomists, economists, 
politicians, discover suddenly that it is good for nothing but to produce 
forage. M. Leonce de Lavergne has hastened to repeat this on the other side of 
the Channel. It takes a "serious" man, a la Lavergne, to be caught by such 
childishness. 



713 



PART Mil 

THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 



CHAPTER XXVI 
THE SECRET OF PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 

We have seen how money is changed into capital; how 
through capital surplus-value is made, and from sur- 
plus-value more capital. But the accumulation of capital pre- 
supposes surplus-value; surplus-value pre-supposes capitalistic 
production; capitalistic production pre-supposes the pre-exist- 
ence of considerable masses of capital and of labour-power in 
the hands of producers of commodities. The whole movement, 
therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can 
only get by supposing a primitive accumulation (previous accu- 
mulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation; 
an accumulation not the result of the capitalist mode of production 
but its starting-point. 

This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy 
about the same part as original sin in theology. Adam bit the 
apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. Its origin is 
supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote of the 
past. In times long gone by there were two sorts of people; one, 
the diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, 
lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in riotous living. 
The legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man 
came to be condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; 
but the history of economic original sin reveals to us that there are 
people to whom this is by no means essential. Never mind! Thus 
it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the 
latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins. And 
from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority 
that, despite all its labour, has up to now nothing to sell but 
itself, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly although 
they have long ceased to work. Such insipid childishness is every 



714 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

day preached to us in the defence of property. M. Thiers, e.g., 
had the assurance to repeat it with all the solemnity of a states- 
man, to the French people, once so spirituel. But as soon as the 
question of property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to pro- 
claim the intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all 
ages and for all stages of development. In actual history it is 
notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly 
force, play the great part. In the tender annals of Political 
Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial. Right and 
"labour" were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the 
present year of course always excepted. As a matter of fact, 
the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but 
idyllic. 

In themselves money and commodities are no more capital 
than are the means of production and of subsistence. They 
want transforming into capital. But this transformation itself 
can only take place under certain circumstances that centre in 
this, viz., that two very different kinds of commodity-possessors 
must come face to face and into contact; on the one hand, the 
owners of money, means of production, means of subsistence, 
who are eager to increase the sum of values they possess, by buying 
other people's labour-power; on the other hand, free labourers, 
the sellers of their own labour-power, and therefore the sellers of 
labour. Free labourers, in the double sense that neither they 
themselves form part and parcel of the means of production, 
as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &amp;c, nor do the means of pro- 
duction belong to them, as in the case of peasant-proprietors; 
they are, therefore, free from, unencumbered by, any means of 
production of their own. With this polarisation of the market for 
commodities, the fundamental conditions of capitalist produc- 
tion are given. The capitalist system pre-supposes the complete 
separation of the labourers from all property in the means by which 
they can realise their labour. As soon as capitalist production is 
once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but 
reproduces it on a continually extending scale. The process, 
therefore, that clears the way for the capitalist system, can be none 
other than the process which takes away from the labourer the 
possession of his means of production; a process that transforms, 
on the one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production 
into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage- 
labourers. The so-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is 
nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer 
from the means of production. It appears as primitive, because 



THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 715 

it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the mode of pro- 
duction corresponding with it. 

The economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out 
of the economic structure of feudal society. The dissolution of 
the latter set free the elements of the former. 

The immediate producer, the labourer, could only dispose of 
his own person after he had ceased to be attached to the soil 
and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondman of another. To 
become a free seller of labour-power, who carries his commodity 
wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from 
the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and jo*urney- 
men, and the impediments of their labour regulations. Hence, 
the historical movement which changes the producers into 
wage-workers, appears, on the one hand, as their emancipation 
from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side 
alone exists for our bourgeois historians. But, on the other 
hand, these new freedmen became sellers of themselves only 
after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, 
and of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal 
arrangements. And the history of this, their expropriation, is 
written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire. 

The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their 
part not only to displace the guild masters of handicrafts, but 
also the feudal lords, the possessors of the sources of wealth. In 
this respect their conquest of social power appears as the fruit of 
a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and its revolting 
prerogatives, and against the guilds and the fetters they laid 
on the free development of production and the free exploitation 
of man by man. The chevaliers d'industrie, however, only succeeded 
in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events 
of which they themselves were wholly innocent. They have risen 
by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on 
a time made himself the master of his patronus. 

The starting-point of the development that gave rise to the 
wage-labourer as well' as to the capitalist, was the servitude of 
the labourer. The advance consisted in a change of form of 
this servitude, in the transformation of feudal exploitation into 
capitalist exploitation. To understand its march, we need not 
go back very far. Although we come across the first beginnings 
of capitalist production as early as the 14th or 15th century, 
sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capi- 
talistic era dates from the 16th century. Wherever it appears, 
the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest 



716 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, 
has been long on the wane. 

In the history of primitive accumulation, all revolutions are 
epoch-making that act as levers for the capitalist class in course 
of formation; but, above all, those moments when great masses 
of men are suddenly and forcibly torn from their means of sub- 
sistence, and hurled as free and "unattached" proletarians on the 
labour-market. The expropriation of the agricultural producer, 
of the peasant, from the soil, is the basis of the whole process. 
The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes 
different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different 
orders of succession, and at different periods. In England alone, 
which we take as our example, has it the classic form. 1 



1 In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest, the disso- 
lution of serfdom also took place earlier than elsewhere. The serf was emanci- 
pated in that country before he had acquired any prescriptive right to the 
soil. His emancipation at once transformed him into a free proletarian, who, 
moreover, found his master ready waiting for him in the towns, for the most 
part handed down as legacies from the Roman time. When the revolution of 
the world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated Northern 
Italy's commercial supremacy, a movement in the reverse direction set in. 
The labourers of the towns were driven en masse into the country, and gave 
an impulse, never before seen, to the petite culture, carried on in the form 
of gardening. 



717 



CHAPTER XXVII 

EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 

FROM THE LAND 

In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last 
part of the 14th century. The immense majority of the popula- 
tion 1 consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th 
century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal 
title under which their right of property was hidden. In the larger 
seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced 
by the free farmer. The wage-labourers of agriculture consisted 
partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working 
on the large estates, partly of an independent special class of 
wage-labourers, relatively and absolutely few in numbers. The 
latter also were practically at the same time peasant farmers, 
since, besides their wages, they had allotted to them arable land 
to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages. Be- 
sides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of 
the common land, which gave pasture to their cattle, furnished 
them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &amp;c. 2 In all countries of Europe, 



1 "The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own 
hands, and enjoyed a modest competence.... then formed a much more impor- 
tant part of the nation than at present. If we may trust the best statistical 
writers of that age, not less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, 
must have made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived their 
subsistence from little freehold estates. The average income of these small 
landlords. . . was estimated at between £60 and £70 a year. It was computed that 
the number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than the number 
of those who farmed the land of others." Macaulay: "History of England," 10th 
ed., 1854, I. pp. 333, 334. Even in the last third of the 17th century, 4 / s of the 
English people were agricultural. (1. c, p. 413.) I quote Macaulay, because 
as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as much as possible facts of 
this kind. 

2 We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if 
but a tribute-paying owner, of the piece of land attached to his house, but 



718 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

feudal production is characterised by division of the soil 
amongst the greatest possible number of sub-feudatories. The 
might of the feudal lord, like that of the sovereign, depended 
not on the length of his rent-roll, but on the number of his sub- 
jects, and the latter depended on the number of peasant pro- 
prietors. 1 Although, therefore, the English land, after the Norman 
conquest, was distributed in gigantic baronies, one of which often 
included some 900 of the old Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was 
bestrewn with small peasant properties, only here and there 
interspersed with great seignorial domains. Such conditions, 
together with the prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 
15th century, allowed of that wealth of the people which Chancellor 
Fortescue so eloquently paints in his "Laudes legum Angliae"; 
but it excluded the possibility of capitalistic wealth. 

The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of 
the capitalist mode of production, was played in the last third 
of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. A mass 
of free proletarians was hurled on the labour-market by the 
breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James 
Steuart well says, "everywhere uselessly filled house and castle." 
Although the royal power, itself a product of bourgeois develop- 
ment, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on 
the dissolution of these bands of retainers, it was by no means 
the sole cause of it. In insolent conflict with king and parliament, 
the great feudal lords created an incomparably larger proletar- 
iat by the forcible driving of the peasantry from the land, to 
which the latter had the same feudal right as the lord himself, 
and by the usurpation of the common lands. The rapid rise of the 
Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding rise in the 
price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evic- 
tions. The old nobility had been devoured by the great feudal 
wars. The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money 
was the power of all powers. Transformation of arable land into 



also a co-possessor of the common land. "Le paysan (in Silesia, under Freder- 
ick II.) est serf." Nevertheless, these serfs possess common lands. "On n'a pas 
pu encore engager les Silesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la 
Nouvelle Marche, il n'y a guere de village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec 
le plus grand succes." (Mirabeau: "De la Monarchic Prussienne." Londres, 
1788, t. ii, pp. 125, 126.) 

1 Japan, with its purely feudal organisation of landed property and its 
developed petite culture, gives a much truer picture of the European middle 
ages than all our history books, dictated as these are, for the most part, by 
bourgeois prejudices. It is very convenient to be "liberal" at the expense of 
the middle ages. 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 719 

sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. Harrison, in his "Descrip- 
tion of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles," describes 
how the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country. 
"What care our great encroachers?" The dwellings of the peasants 
and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the ground or doomed 
to decay. "If," says Harrison, "the old records of euerie manour be 
sought ... it will soon appear that in some manour seventeene, 
eighteene, or twentie houses are shrunk . . . that England was 
neuer less furnished with people than at the present ... Of cities 
and townes either utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half 
diminished, though some one be a little increased here or there; 
of townes pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the 
lordships now standing in them ... I could saie somewhat." The 
complaints of these old chroniclers are always exaggerated, but 
they reflect faithfully the impression made on contempcraries 
by the revolution in the conditions of production. A comparison 
of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More reveals 
the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. As Thornton rightly 
has it, the English working-class was precipitated without any 
transition from its golden into its iron age. 

Legislation was terrified at this revolution. It did not yet 
stand on that height of civilisation where the "wealth of the na- 
tion" (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploita- 
tion and impoverishing of the mass of the people) figure as the 
ultima Thule of all state-craft. In his history of Henry VII., 
Bacon says: "Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more 
frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be manured 
without people and families) was turned into pasture, which 
was easily rid by a few herdsmen; and tenancies for years, lives, 
and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) were turned 
into demesnes. This bred a decay of people, and (by consequence) 
a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the like .... In remedy- 
ing of this inconvenience the king's wisdom was admirable, 
and the parliament's at that time . . . they took a course to take 
away depopulating inclosures, and depopulating pasturage." 
An Act of Henry VII., 1489, cap. 19, forbad the destruction of 
all "houses of husbandry" to which at least 20 acres of land be- 
longed. By an Act, 25 Henry VIII., the same law was renewed. 
It recites, among other things, that many farms and large flocks of 
cattle, especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few 
men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has fall- 
en off, churches and houses have been pulled down, and marvellous 
numbers of people have been deprived of the means wherewith 



720 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

to maintain themselves and their families. The Act, there- 
fore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farm-steads, and fixes 
a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &amp;c. An Act of 
1533 recites that some owners possess 24,000 sheep, and limits 
the number to be owned to 2,00c). 1 The cry of the people and the 
legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII., against 
the expropriation of the small farmers and peasants, were alike 
fruitless. The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing 
it, reveals to us. "The device of King Henry VII.," says Bacon, 
in his "Essays, Civil and Moral," Essay 29, "was profound and 
admirable, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a stand- 
ard; that is, maintained with such a proportion of land unto 
them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no 
servile condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners 
and not mere hirelings." 2 What the capitalist system demanded 
was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost servile condition 
of the mass of the people, the transformation of them into mercen- 
aries, and of their means of labour into capital. During this trans- 
formation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of 
land by the cottage of the agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad 
him to take lodgers into his cottage. In the reign of James I., 1627, 
Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built 



1 In his "Utopia," Thomas More says, that in England "your shepe that 
were wont to be so meke and tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, 
be become so great devourers and so wylde that they eate up, and swallow 
downe, the very men themselfes." "Utopia," transl. by Robinson, ed. Arber, 
Lond., 1869, p. 41. 

2 Bacon shows the connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and 
good infantry. "This did wonderfully concern the might and mannerhood of 
the kingdom to have farms as it were of a standard sufficient to maintain an 
able body out of penury, and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands 
of the kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or middle peo- 
ple, of a condition between gentlemen, and cottagers and peasants For it 

hath been held by the general opinion of men of best judgment in the wars.... 
that the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot* And 
to make good infantry it requireth men bred, not in a servile or indigent fash- 
ion, but in some free and plentiful manner. Therefore, if a state run most to 
noblemen and gentlemen, and that the husbandmen and ploughmen be but 
as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers (which are but hous'd 
beggars), you may have a good cavalry, but never good stable bands of foot.... 
And this is to be seen in France, and Italy, and some other parts abroad, where 
in effect all is noblesse or peasantry.... insomuch that they are inforced to 
employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for ttieir battalions of foot; 
whereby also it comes to pass that those nations have much people and few 
soldiers." ('The Reign of Henry VII." Verbatim reprint from Rennet's Eng- 
land. Ed. 1719. Lond., 1870, p. 308.) 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 721 

a cottage on the manor of Front Mill without 4 acres of land at- 
tached to the same in perpetuity. As late as Charles I.'s reign, 1638, 
a royal commission was appointed to enforce the carrying out 
of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4 acres of land. 
Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a house within 4 miles 
of London was forbidden unless it was endowed with 4 acres of 
land. As late a? the first half of the 18th century complaint is 
made if the cottar-e of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct 
of one or two acres of land. Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished 
with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, 
a few roods. "Landlords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, "work here 
hand in hand. A few acres to the cottage would make the labourers 
too independent." 1 

The process of forcible expropriation of the people received 
in the 16th century a new and frightful impulse from the Refor- 
mation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church 
property. The Catholic church was, at the time of the Reforma- 
tion, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land. The 
suppression of the monasteries, &amp;c, hurled their inmates into 
the proletariat. The estates of the church were to a large extent 
given away to rapacious royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price 
to speculating farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the 
hereditary sub-tenants and threw their holdings into one. The 
legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the 
church's tithes was tacitly confiscated. 2 "Pauper ubique jacet," 
cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England. In the 
43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pau- 
perism officially by the introduction of a poor-rate. "The authors 
of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, 
for [contrary to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever." 3 
By the 16th of Charles I., ch. 4, it was declared perpetual, and 
in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher iormJ These 



1 Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 134. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old 
laws) would now be judged too great for labourers, and rather as likely to con- 
vert them into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The Social History of the 
People of the Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries." Lond., 
1856, pp. 184-185.) 

2 'The right of the poor to share in the tithe, is established by theten- 
our of ancient statutes." (Tuckett, 1. c, Vol. II., pp. 804-805). 

3 William Cobbett: "A History of the Protestant Reformation," § 471. 

4 The "spirit" of Protestantism may be seen from the following, among 
other things. In the south of England certain landed proprietors and well-to-do 
farmers put their heads together and propounded ten questions as to the right 
interpretation of the poor-law of Elizabeth. These they laid before a celebrated 



722 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

immediate results of the Reformation were not its most lasting 
ones. The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of 
the traditional conditions of landed property. With its fall these 
were no longer tenable. x 

Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, 
the class of independent peasants, were more numerous than 
the class of farmers. They had formed the backbone of Cromwell's 
strength, and, even according to the confession of Macaulay, stood 
in favourable contrast to the drunken squires and to their serv- 



jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a judge under James I.) for his 
opinion. "Question 9 — Some of the more wealthy farmers in the parish have 
devised a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing this Act (the 
43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. They have proposed that we shall erect 
a prison in the parish, and then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if 
any persons are disposed to farm the poor of this parish, they do give in sealed 
proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price at which they will take 
them off our hands; and that they will be authorised to refuse to any one un- 
less he be shut up in the aforesaid prison. The proposers of this plan conceive 
that there will be found in the adjoining counties, persons, who, being un- 
willing to labour and not possessing substance or credit to take a farm or ship, 
so as to live without labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous 
offer to the parish. If any of the poor perish under the contractor's care, the 
sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have done its duty by them. We 
are, however, apprehensive that the present Act (43rd of Elizabeth) will 
not warrant a prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that the 
rest of the freeholders of the county, and of the adjoining county of B, will 
very readily join in instructing their members to propose an Act to enable the 
parish to contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to declare 
that if any person shall refuse to be so locked up and worked, he shall be en- 
titled to no relief. This, it is hoped, will prevent persons in distress from 
wanting relief, and be the means of keeping down parishes." (R. Blakey: "The 
History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times." Lond., 1855, Vol. 
II., pp. 84-85.) In Scotland, the abolition of serfdom took place some centu- 
ries later than in England. Even in 1698, Fletcher of Sultoun, declared in the 
Scotch parliament, "The number of beggars in Scotland is reckoned at not 
less than 200,000. The only remedy that I, a republican on principle, can sug- 
gest, is to restore the old state of serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are 
unable to provide for their own subsistence." Eden, I.e., Book 1., ch. 1., pp. 
60-61, says, "The decrease of villenage seems necessarily to have been the 
era of the origin of the poor. Manufactures and commerce are the two parents 
of our national poor." Eden, like our Scotch republican on principle, errs only 
in this: not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the property of the 
agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a 
pauper. In France, where the expropriation was effected in another way, the 
ordonnance of Moulins, 1571, and the Edict of 1656, correspond to the English 
poor-laws. 

1 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in 
the University of Oxford, the hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface 
to the "History of Agriculture" lays stress on the fact of the pauperisation of 
the mass of the people by the Reformation. 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 723 

ants, the country clergy, who had to marry their masters' cast-off 
mistresses. About 1750, the yeomanry had disappeared, * and so 
had, in the last decade of the 18th century, the last trace of the 
common land of the agricultural labourer. We leave on one side 
here the purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution. 
We deal only with the forcible means employed. 

After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors 
carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation, effected everywhere 
on the Continent without any legal formality. They abolished 
the feudal tenure of land, i.e., they got rid of all its obligations 
to the State, "indemnified" the State by taxes on the peasantry 
and the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for themselves 
the rights of modern private property in estates to which they 
had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed those laws of settle- 
ment, which, mutatis mutandis, had the same effect on the Eng- 
lish agricultural labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris Godunof 
on the Russian peasantry. 

The "glorious Revolution" brought into power, along with 
William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist appropriators of 
surplus-value. 2 They inaugurated the new era by practising on 
a colossal scale thefts of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto 
managed more modestly. These estates were given away, sold at a 
ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct 
seizure. 3 All this happened without the slightest observation of 

1 "A Letter to Sir T. G. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. 
By a Suffolk Gentleman." Ipswich, 1795, p. 4. Even the fanatical advocate of 
the system of large farms, the author of the "Inquiry into the Connexion 
between the Present Price of Provisions," London, 1773, p, 139, says: 
"I most lament the loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up 
the independence of this nation; and sorry I am to see their lands now in the 
hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who hold their 
leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a 
summons on every mischievous occasion." 

2 On the private moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other 
things: "The large grant of lands in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in 1695, is a pub- 
lic instance of the king's affection, and the lady's influence... Lady Orkney's 
endearing offices are supposed to have been — fceda labiorum ministerial 
(In the Sloane Manuscript Collection, at the British Museum, No. 4224. The 
Manuscript is entitled: "The character and behaviour of King William, Sun- 
derland, etc., as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of Shrewsbury 
from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc." It is full of curiosa. 

3 "The illegal alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and part- 
ly by gift, is a scandalous chapter in English history... a gigantic fraud on the 
nation." (F. W. Newman, "Lectures on Political Economy." London, 1851, pp. 
129, 130.) [For details as to how the present large landed proprietors of Eng- 
land came into their possessions see "Our Old Nobility. By Noblesse Oblige." 
London, 1879.— F. £.] 



724 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

legal etiquette. The Grown lands thus fraudulently appropriated, 
together with the robbery of the Church estates, as far as these 
had not been lost again during the republican revolution, form the 
basis of the to-day princely domains of the English oligarchy. 1 
The bourgeois capitalists favoured the operation with the view, 
among others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the 
domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and to 
increasing their supply of the free agricultural proletarians ready 
to hand. Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural 
ally of the new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, 
and of the large manufacturers, then depending on protective 
duties. The English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite 
as wisely as did the Swedish bourgeoisie who, reversing the proc- 
ess, hand in hand with their economic allies, the peasantry, 
helped the kings in the forcible resumption of the Crown lands from 
the oligarchy. This happened since 1604 under Charles X. and 
Charles XL 

Communal property — always distinct from the State prop- 
erty just dealt with — was an old Teutonic institution which 
lived on under cover of feudalism. We have seen how the forcible 
usurpation of this, generally accompanied by the turning of arable 
into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th and extends into 
the 16th century. But, at that time, the process was carried on by 
means of individual acts of violence against which legislation, 
for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain. The advance made 
by the 18th century shows itself in this, that the law itself becomes 
now the instrument of the theft of the people's land, although the 
large farmers make use of their little independent methods as 
well. 2 The parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for 
enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by which the land- 
lords grant themselves the people's land as private property, 
decrees of expropriation of the people. Sir F. M. Eden refutes his 
own crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent com- 
munal property as the private property of the great landlords 
who have taken the place of the feudal lords, when he, himself, 



1 Read, e.g., E. Burke's Pamphlet on the ducal house of Bedford, 
whose offshoot was Lord John Russell, the "tomtit of Liberalism." 

2 "The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides 
themselves and children, under the pretence that if they keep any beasts or 
poultry, they will steal from the farmers' barns for their support; they also 
say, keep the cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &amp;c, but the 
real fact, I believe, is that the farmers may have the whole right of common to 
themselves." ("A Political Inquiry into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste 
Lands." London, 1785, p. 75.) 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 725 

demands a "general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of Com- 
mons" (admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat is 
necessary for its transformation into private property), and more- 
over calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the 
expropriated poor. 1 

Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by 
tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases, a servile rabble 
dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic rob- 
bery of the Communal lands helped especially, next to the theft 
of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that were called 
in the 18th century capital farms 2 or merchant farms, 3 and to 
"set free" the agricultural population as proletarians for manu- 
facturing industry. 

The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully as 
the 19th, the identity between national wealth and the poverty 
of the people. Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic 
literature of that time, on the "enclosure of commons." From the 
mass of materials that lie before me, I give a few extracts that 
will throw a strong light on the circumstances of the time. "In 
several parishes of Hertfordshire," writes one indignant person, 
"24 farms, numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been 
melted up into three farms." 4 "In Northamptonshire and Leices- 
tershire the enclosure of common lands has taken place on a very 
large scale, and most of the new lordships, resulting from the en- 
closure, have been turned into pasturage, in consequence of which 
many lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in which 
1,500 were ploughed formerly. The ruins of former dwelling-houses, 
barns, stables, &amp;c," are the sole traces of the former inhabitants. 
"An hundred houses and families have in some open field villages 
. . . . dwindled to eight or ten. . . . The landholders in most 
parishes that have been enclosed only 15 or 20 years, are very 
few in comparison of the numbers who occupied them in their open- 
field state. It is no uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to 
engross a large enclosed lordship which was before in the hands 
of 20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and proprietors. 
All these are hereby thrown out of their livings with their families 

1 Eden, 1. c, preface. 

2 "Capital Farms." Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of 
Corn. By a person in business. London, 1767, pp. 19, 20. 

3 "Merchant Farms." "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High 
Price of Provisions." London, 1767, p. 11. Note. — This excellent work, that 
was published anonymously, is by the Rev. Nathaniel Forster. 

4 Thomas Wright: "A Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly 
of Large Farms," 1779, pp. 2, 3. 



726 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

and many other families who were chiefly employed and sup- 
ported by them." 1 It was not only the land that lay waste, but 
often land cultivated either in common or held under a definite 
rent paid to the community, that was annexed by the neighbour- 
ing landlords under pretext of enclosure. "I have here in view 
enclosures of open fields and lands already improved. It is acknowl- 
edged by even the writers in defence of enclosures that these di- 
minished villages increase the monopolies of farms, raise the 
prices of provisions, and produce depopulation . . . and even 
the enclosure of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on 
the poor, by depriving them of a part of their subsistence, and 
only goes towards increasing farms already too large." 2 "When," 
says Dr. Price, "this land gets into the hands of a few great 
farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers" 
(earlier designated by him "a multitude of little proprietors and 
tenants, who maintain themselves and families by the produce 
of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, by poul- 
try, hogs, &amp;c, and who therefore have little occasion to purchase 
any of the means of subsistence") "will be converted into a body 
of men who earn their subsistence by working for others, and who 
will be under a necessity of going to market for all they want. . . . 
There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there will be more 
compulsion to it. . . . Towns and manufactures will increase, 
because more will be driven to them in quest of places and employ- 
ment. This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally 
operates. And this is the way in which, for many years, it has 
been actually operating in this kingdom." 3 He sums up the effect of 
the enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the 
lower ranks of men are altered in almost every respect for the 
worse. From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the 
state of day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their 
subsistence in that state has become more difficult." 4 In fact, 



1 Rev. Addington: "Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing 
Open Fields." London, 1772, pp. 37, 43 passim. 

' 2 Dr. R. Price, 1. c, v. ii., p. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and 
James Anderson, should be read and compared with the miserable prattle of 
Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue: "The Literature of Political Econo- 
my," London, 1845. 

3 Price, 1. c, p. 147. 

4 Price, 1. c, p. 159. We are reminded of ancint Rome. "The rich had 
got possession of the greater part of the undivided land. They trusted in the 
conditions of the time, that these possessions would not be again taken from 
them, and bought, therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and 
belonging to the poor, with the acquiescence of their owners, and took some 



EXPROPRIATION OP AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 727 

usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in agricul- 
ture accompanying this, told so acutely on the agricultural 
labourers that, even according to Eden, between 1765 and 1780, 
their wages began to fall below the minimum, and to be supple- 
mented by official poor-law relief. Their wages, he says, "were 
not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life." 

Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an 
opponent of Dr. Price. "Nor is it a consequence that there must 
be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their labour 
in the open field. ... If, by converting the little farmers into a 
body of men who must work for others, more labour is produced, 
it is an advantage which the nation" (to which, of course, the "con- 
verted" ones do not belong) "should wish for. . . . the produce being 
greater when their joint labours are employed on one farm, there 
will be a surplus for manufactures, and by this means manu- 
factures, one of the mines of the nation, will increase, in propor- 
tion to the quantity of corn produced." 1 

The stoical peace of mind with which the political economist 
regards the most shameless violation of the "sacred rights of 
property" and the grossest acts of violence to persons, as soon 
as they are necessary to lay the foundations of the capitalistic 
mode of production, is shown by Sir F. M. Eden, philanthropist 
and tory, to boot. The whole series of thefts, outrages, and popu- 
lar misery, that accompanied the forcible expropriation of the 
people, from the last third of the 15th to the end of the 18th cen- 
tury, lead him merely to the comfortable conclusion: "The due 



by force, so that they now were cultivating widely extended domains, instead 
of isolated fields. Then they employed slaves in agriculture and cattle-breed- 
ing, because freemen would have been taken from labour for military serv- 
ice. The possession of slaves brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on 
account of their immunity from military service, could freely multiply and 
have a multitude of children. Thus the powerful men drew all wealth to them- 
selves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. The Italians, on the other hand, 
were always decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty, taxes, 
and military service. Even when times of peace came, they were doomed to 
complete inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil, and used 
slaves instead of freemen in the tilling of it." (Appian: "Civil Wars," I. 7.) This 
passage refers to the time before the Licinian rogations. Military service, 
which hastened to so great an extent the ruin of the Roman plebeians, was 
also the chief means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought 
about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs and bondsmen. 
1 "An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provi- 
sions, &amp;c," pp. 124, 129. To the like effect, but with an opposite tendency: 
"Working-men are driven from their cottages and forced into the towns to 
seek for employment; but then a larger surplus is obtained, an thus capital 
is augmented." ("The Perils of the Nation," 2nd ed. London., 1843, p. 14.) 



728 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

proportion between arable land and pasture had to be established. 
During the whole of the 14th and the greater part of the 15th cen- 
tury, there was one acre of pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable 
land. About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was 
changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of pasture to 
one of arable, until at last the just proportion of 3 acres of pasture 
to one of arable land was attained." 

In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion 
between the agricultural labourer and the communal property 
had, of course, vanished. To say nothing of more recent times, 
have the agricultural population received a farthing of compen- 
sation for the 3,511,770 acres of common land which between 
1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary de- 
vices presented to the landlords by the landlords? 

The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricul- 
tural population from the soil is, finally, the so-called clearing 
of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. All the English 
methods hitherto considered culminated in "clearing." As we saw 
in the picture of modern conditions given in a former chapter, 
where there are no more independent peasants to get rid of, the 
"clearing" of cottages begins; so that the agricultural labourers do 
not find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary 
for their own housing. But what "clearing of estates" really and 
properly signifies, we learn only in the promised land of modern 
romance, the Highlands of Scotland. There the process is distin- 
guished by its systematic character, by the magnitude of the scale 
on which it is carried out at one blow (in Ireland landlords have 
gone to the length of sweeping away several villages at once; in 
Scotland areas as large as German principalities are dealt with), 
finally by the peculiar form of property, under which the embez- 
zled lands were held. 

The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which 
was the owner of the land on which it was settled. The repre- 
sentative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only the titu- 
lar owner of this property, just as the Queen of England is the 
titular owner of all the national soil. When the English govern- 
ment succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of these "great 
men," and their constant incursions into the Lowland plains, the 
chiefs of the clans by no means gave up their time-honoured trade 
as robbers; they only changed its form. On their own authority 
they transformed their nominal right into a right of private prop- 
erty, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, 
resolved to drive them out by open force. "A king of England might 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 729 

as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea," says Professor 
Newman. 1 This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last 
rising of the followers of the Pretender, can be followed through 
its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart 2 and James 
Anderson. 3 In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were for- 
bidden to emigrate from the country, with a view to driving them 
by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. 4 As an exam- 
ple of the method 5 obtaining in the 19th century, the "clearing" 
made by the Duchess of Sutherland will suffice here. This person, 
well instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her govern- 
ment, to effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole country, whose 
population had already been, by earlier processes of the like kind, 
reduced to 15,000, into a sheep-walk. From 1814 to 1820 these 
15,000 inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were systematically hunt- 
ed and rooted out. All their villages were destroyed and burnt, 

1 1. c, p. 132. 

2 Steuart says: "If you compare the rent of these lauds" (he erroneously 
includes in this economic category the tribute of the taskmen to the clan- 
chief) "with the extent, it appears very small. If you compare it with the num- 
bers fed upon the farm, you will find that an estate in the Highlands main- 
tains, perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same value in a 
good and fertile province." (1. c, vol. i., ch. xvi., p. 104.) 

3 James Anderson: "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit 
of National Industry, &amp;c," Edinburgh, 1777. 

4 In 1860 the people expropriated by force were exported to Canada un- 
der false pretences. Some fled to the mountains and neighbouring islands. 
They were followed by the police, came to blows with them and escaped. 

5 "In the Highlands of Scotland," says Buchanan, the commentator on 
Adam Smith, 1814, "the ancient state of property is daily subverted.... The 
landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a category used in error 
here), now offers his land to the highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, in- 
stantly adopts a new system of cultivation. The land, formerly overspread 
with small tenants or labourers, was peopled in proportion to its produce, 
but under the new system of improved cultivation and increased rents, the 
largest possible produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the use- 
less hands being, with this view, removed, the population is reduced, not to 
what the land will maintain, but to what it will employ. "The dispossessed ten- 
ants either seek a subsistence in the neighbouring towns," &amp;c. (David Bucha- 
nan: "Observations on, &amp;.C., A. Smith's Wealth of Nations." Edinburgh, 1814, 
vol. iv., p. 144.) "The Scotch grandees dispossessed families as they would 
grub up coppice-wood, and they treated villages and their people as Indians 
harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a jungle with tigers.... Man 
is bartered for a fleece or a carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper .... Why, how 
much worse is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had bro- 
ken into the northern provinces of China, proposed in council to exterminate 
the inhabitants, and convert the land into pasture. This proposal many High- 
land proprietors have effected in their own country against their own coun- 
trymen." (George Ensor: "An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations." 
Lond., 1818, pp. 215, 216.) 



730 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

all their fields turned into pasturage. British soldiers enforced this 
eviction, and came to blows with the inhabitants. One old woman 
was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which she refused to 
leave. Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that 
had from time immemorial belonged to the clan. She assigned 
to the expelled inhabitants about 6,000 acres on the sea-shore — 
2 acres per family. The 6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, 
and brought in no income to their owners. The Duchess, in the 
nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an 
average rent of 2s. 6d. per acre to the clansmen, who for centuries 
had shed their blood for her family. The whole of the stolen clan- 
land she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a 
single family, for the most part imported English farm-servants. 
In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels were already replaced by 131,000 
sheep. The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore, tried 
to live by catching fish. They became amphibious and lived, as 
an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal 
only half on both. x 

But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their 
idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the "great men" of 
the clan. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men. 
They scented some profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great 
fishmongers of London. For the second time the Gaels were hunt- 
ed out. 2 

But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer 
preserves. Every one knows that there are no real forests in 
England. The deer in the parks of the great are demurely do- 
mestic cattle, fat as London aldermen. Scotland is therefore the 
last refuge of the "noble passion." "In the Highlands," says Somers 
in 1848, "new forests are springing up like mushrooms. Here, 
on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest of Glenfeshie; 
and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie. 

1 When the present Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. Beecher 
Stowe, authoress of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London 
to show her sympathy for the negro slaves of the American republic — a sym- 
pathy that she prudently forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civ- 
il war, in which every "noble" English heart beat for the slave-owner — I 
gave in the New York Tribune the facts about the Sutherland slaves. (Epi- 
tomised in part by Carey in "The Slave Trade." Philadelphia, 1853, pp. 203, 
204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a pretty po- 
lemic between the latter and the sycophants of the Sutherlands. 

2 Interesting details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David Urqu- 
hart's Portfolio, new series.— Nassau W. Senior, in his posthumous work, al- 
ready quoted, terms "the proceedings in Sutherlandshire one of the most 
beneficent clearings since the memory of man." (1. c.) 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 731 

In the same line you have the Black Mount, an immense waste 
also recently erected. From east to west— from the neighbour- 
hood of Aberdeen to the crags of Oban — you have now a contin- 
uous line of forests; while in other parts of the Highlands there 
are the new forests of Loch Archaig, Glengarry, Glenmoriston, 
&amp;c. Sheep were introduced into glens which had been the seats of 
communities of small farmers; and the latter were driven to seek 
subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. Now deer 
are supplanting sheep; and these are once more dispossessing 
the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon 
still coarser land and to more grinding penury. Deer-forests 1 
and the people cannot co-exist. One or other of the two must 
yield. Let the forests be increased in number and extent during 
the next quarter of a century, as they have been in the last, and 
the Gaels will perish from their native soil. . . This movement 
among the Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambi- 
tion . . . with some love of sport . . . while others, of a more 
practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely to profit. 
For it is a fact, that a mountain range laid out in forest is, in 
many cases, more profitable to the proprietor than when let as a 

sheep-walk The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits 

his offers by no other calculation than the extent of his purse. . . . 
Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe 
than those occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. Deer 
have received extended ranges, while men have been hunted within 
a narrower and still narrower circle. . . . One after one the liber- 
ties of the people have been cloven down. . . . And the oppressions 
are daily on the increase. . . . The clearance and dispersion 
of the people is pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, 
as an agricultural necessity, just as trees and brushwood are 
cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the oper- 
ation goes on in a quiet, business-like way, &amp;c." 2 



1 The deer-forests of Scotland contain not a single tree. The sheep are 
driven from, and then the deer driven to, the naked hills, and then it is 
called a deer-forest. Not even timber-planting and real forest culture. 

2 Robert Somers: "Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847." 
London, 1848, pp. 12-28 passim. These letters originally appeared in The 
Times. The English economists of course explained the famine of the Gaels 
in 1847, by their over-population. At all events, they "were pressing on their 
food-supply." The "clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany, "Bauern- 
legen," occurred in Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to 
peasant-revolts as late as 1790 in Kursachsen. It obtained especially in East 
Germany. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II. for the first time se- 
cured right of property for the peasants. After the conquest of Silesia he forced 



732 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



The spoliation of the church's property, the fraudulent alien- 
ation of the State domains, the robbery of the common lands, 
the usurpation of feudal and clan property, and its transforma- 
tion into modern private property under circumstances of reck- 



the landlords to rebuild the huts, barns, etc., and to provide the peasants 
with cattle and implements. He wanted soldiers for his army and tax-payers 
for his treasury. For the rest, the pleasant life that the peasant led under 
Frederick's system of finance and hodge-podge rule of despotism, bureau- 
cracy and feudalism, may be seen from the following quotation from his ad- 
mirer, Mirabeau: "Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du cultivateur 
dans le Nord de l'Allemagne. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce 
n'est qu'une ressource contre la misere et non un moyen de bien-etre. Les 
impots directs, les corvees, les servitudes de tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur 
allemand, qui paie encore des impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete.... 
et pour comble de ruine, il n'ose pas vendre ses productions ou et comme il 
le veut; il n'ose pas acheter ce dont il a besoin aux marchands qui pourraient 
le lui livrerau meilleur prix. Toutesces causes le ruinent insensiblement, et 
il se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impdts directs a l'ech6ance sans la 
filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, ses en- 
fants, ses servants, ses valets, et lui-meme; mais quelle penible vie, merae 
aidee de ce secours. En 6te, il travaille comme un forcat au labourage et a la 
r£colte; il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux; 
en hiver il devrait Sparer ses forces par un plus grand repos; mais il manqu- 
era de grains pour le pain et les semailles, s'il se dSfait des denrees qu'il 
faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. II faut done filer pour suppleer a ce vide 
....il faut y apporter la plus grande assiduite. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-il 
en hiver a minuit, une heure, et se leve a cinq ou six; ou bien il se couche a 
neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tous les jours de la vie si ce n'est le dimanche. 
Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, et de la vien qu' 
homines et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes que dans 
les villes." (Mirabeau, 1. c, t.III, pp. 212 sqq.) 

Note to the second edition. In April 1866, 18 years after the publication 
of the work of Robert Somers quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lec- 
ture before the Society of Arts on the transformation of sheep-walks into 
deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the devastation of the Scot- 
tish Highlands. He says, with other things: "Depopulation and transforma- 
tion into sheep-walks were the most convenient means for getting an income 
without expenditure... A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk was a common 
change in the Highlands. The landowners turned out the sheep as they once 
turned out the men from their estates, and welcomed the new tenants — the 
wild beasts and the feathered birds.... One can walk from the Earl of Dal- 
housie's estates in Forfarshire to John o'Groats, without ever leaving forest 
land.... In many of these woods the fox, the wild cat, the marten, the pole- 
cat, the weasel and the Alpine hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squir- 
rel and the rat have lately made their way into the country. Immense tracts of 
land, much of which is described in the statistical account of Scotland as having 
a pasturage in richness and extent of very superior description, are thus shut 
out from all cultivation and improvement, and are solely devoted to the sport 
of a few persons for a very brief period of the year." The London Economist 
of June 2, 1866, says, "Amongst the items of news in a Scotch paper of last 
week, we read... 'One of the finest sheep farms in Sutherlandshire, for which 



EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 733 

less terrorism, were just so many idyllic methods of primitive 
accumulation. They conquered the field for capitalistic agri- 
culture, made the soil part and parcel of capital, and created for 
the town industries the necessary supply of a "free" and outlawed 
proletariat. 



a rent of £1 ,200 a year was recently offered, on the expiry of the existing lease 
this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest. ' Here we see the modern instincts 
of feudalism ... operating pretty much as they did when the Norman Con- 
queror... destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... Two millions 
of acres... totally laid waste, embracing within their area some of the most 
fertile lands of Scotland. The natural grass of Glen Tilt was among the most 
nutritive in the county of Perth. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was. by far 
the best grazing ground in the wide district of Badenoch; a part of the Black 
Mount forest was the best pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. Some idea 
of the ground laid waste for purely sporting purposes in Scotland may be 
formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger than the whole county of 
Perth. The resources of the forest of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the 
loss sustained from the forced desolations. The ground would pasture 15,000 
sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth part of the old forest ground 
in Scotland ... it might, &amp;c, ... All that forest land is as totally unproduc- 
tive.... It might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of the 
German Ocean.... Such extemporised wildernesses or deserts ought to be 
put down by the decided interference of the Legislature." 



734 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, 

FROM THE END OF THE 15TH CENTURY. 
FORCING DOWN OF WAGES BY ACTS OF PARLIAMENT 

The proletariat created by the breaking up of the bands of 
feudal retainers and by the forcible expropriation of the people 
from the soil, this "free" proletariat could not possibly be absorbed 
by the nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown upon 
the world. On the other hand, these men, suddenly dragged from 
their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt them- 
selves to the discipline of their new condition. They were turned en 
masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, 
in most cases from stress of circumstances. Hence at the end of 
the 15th and during the whole of the 16th century, throughout 
Western Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. The 
fathers of the present working-class were chastised for their en- 
forced transformation into vagabonds and paupers. Legislation 
treated them as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depend- 
ed on their own good will to go on working under the old condi- 
tions that no longer existed. 

In England this legislation began under Henry VII. 

Henry VIII. 1530: Beggars old and unable to work receive 
a beggar's licence. On the other hand, whipping and imprisonment 
for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to the cart-tail and 
whipped until the blood streams from their bodies, then to swear 
an oath to go back to their birthplace or to where they have lived 
the last three years and to "put themselves to labour." What grim 
irony! In27 Henry VIII. the former statute is repeated, but strength- 
ened with new clauses. For the second arrest for vagabondage 
the whipping is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for 



LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 735 

the third relapse the offender is to be executed as a hardened 
criminal and enemy of the common weal. 

Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, 
ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he shall be condemned 
as a slave to the person who has denounced him as an idler. The 
master shall feed his slave on bread and water, weak broth and 
such refuse meat as he thinks fit. He has the right to force him 
to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. 
If the slave is absent a fortnight, he is condemned to slavery for 
life and is to be branded on forehead or back with the letter S; 
if he runs away thrice, he is to be executed as a felon. The master 
can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a slave, just 
as any other personal chattel or cattle. If the slaves attempt any- 
thing against the masters, they are also to be executed. Justices 
of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. If it 
happens that a vagabond has been idling about for three days, 
he is to be taken to his birthplace, branded with a redhot iron 
with the letter V on the breast and be set to work, in chains, in 
the streets or at some other labour. If the vagabond gives a false 
birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, 
of its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an 
S. All persons have the right to take away the children of the vaga- 
bonds and to keep them as apprentices, the young men until the 
24th year, the girls until the 20th. If they run away, they are to 
become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put 
them in irons, whip them, &amp;c, if they like. Every master may 
put an iron ring round the neck, arms or legs of his slave, by 
which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him. x 
The last part of this statute provides, that certain poor people 
may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing to 
give them food and drink and to find them work. This kind of 
parish-slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th 
century under the name of "roundsmen." 

Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years of age are 
to be severely flogged and branded on the left ear unless 
some one will take them into service for two years; in case of a 
repetition of the offence, if they are over 18, they are to be exec- 
uted, unless some one will take them into service for two years; 



1 The author of the "Essay on Trade, etc.," 1770, says, "In the reign of 
Edward VI. indeed the English seem to have set, in good earnest, about en- 
couraging manufactures and employing the poor. This we learn from a remark- 
able statute which runs thus: 'That all vagrants shall be branded, &amp;c.'" 
1. c, p. 5. 



736 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

but for the third offence they are to be executed without mercy as 
felons. Similar statutes: 18 Elizabeth, c. 13, and another of 1597. l 

James I: Any one wandering about and begging is declared 
a rogue and a vagabond. Justices of the peace in petty sessions 
are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first 
offence to imprison them for 6 months, for the second for 2 
years. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and 
as often as the justices of the peace think fit. . . Incorrigible 
and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an R on the left 
shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging 
again, to be executed without mercy. These statutes, legally 
binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only re- 
pealed by 12 Anne, c. 23. 

Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th 
century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was established in 



1 Thomas More says in his "Utopia": "Therfore that on covetous and 
unsatiable cormaraunte and very plage of his native contrey maye compasse 
aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde together within one pale 
or hedge, the husbandmen be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by co- 
ney ne and fraude, or by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs 
and iniuries thei be so weried that they be compelled to sell all: by one meanes, 
therfore, or by other, either by hooke or crooke they muste needes de- 
parte awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues, 
fatherlesse children, widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge babes, and 
their whole household smal in substance, and muche in numbre, as husband- 
rye requireth many handes. Awaye thei trudge, 1 say, owte of their knowen 
accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. All their housholde stuffe, 
which is very little woorthe, thoughe it might well abide the sale: yet beeynge 
sodainely thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for a thing of nought. 
And when they haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then 
els doe but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. 
And yet then also they be caste in prison as vagaboundes, because they go 
aboute and vvorke not: whom no man wyl set a worke though thei neuer so 
willyngly profre themselues therto." Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas 
More says that they were forced to thieve, "7,200 great and petty thieves were 
put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. (Holinshed, "Description of Eng- 
land," Vol 1. p. 186.) In Elizabeth's time, "rogues were trussed up apace, and 
that there was not one year commonly wherein three or four hundred were 
not devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's Annals of the Reforma- 
tion and Establishment of Religion, and other Various Occurrences in the 
Church of England during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign." Seconded., 1725, 
Vol. 2.) According to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 per- 
sons were executed, 35 robbers burnt in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 dis- 
charged as "incorrigible vagabonds." Nevertheless, he is pf opinion that this 
lara:e number of prisoners does not comprise even a fifth of the actual crimi- 
nals, thanks tc the negligence of the justices and the foolish compassion of 
the people; and the other counties of England were not better oft in this 
respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse. 



LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 737 

Paris. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign (Ordinance 
of July 13th, 1777) every man in good health from 16 to 60 years 
of age, if without means of subsistence and not practising a trade, 
is to be sent to the galleys. Of the same nature are the statute of 
Charles V. for the Netherlands (October, 1537), the first edict of 
the States and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the "Plakaat" 
of the United Provinces (June 26, 1649), &amp;c. 

Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated 
from the soil, driven from their homes, turned into vagabonds, 
and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terri- 
ble, into the discipline necessary for the wage system. 

It is not enough that the conditions of labour are concen- 
trated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one pole of society, 
while at the other are grouped masses of men, who have noth- 
ing to sell but their labour-power. Neither is it enough that they 
are compelled to sell it voluntarily. The advance of capitalist 
production develops a working-class, which by education, tra- 
dition, habit, looks upon the conditions of that mode of produc- 
tion as self-evident laws of Nature. The organisation of the capi- 
talist process of production, once fully developed, breaks down 
all resistance. The constant generation of a relative surplus-pop- 
ulation keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and there- 
fore keeps wages, in a rut that corresponds with the wants of 
capital. The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the 
subjection of the labourer to the capitalist. Direct force, outside 
economic conditions, is of course still used, but only exceptional- 
ly. In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the 
"natural laws of production," i.e., to his dependence on capital, 
a dependence springing from, and guaranteed in perpetuity by, 
the conditions of production themselves. It is otherwise during 
the historic genesis of capitalist production. The bourgeoisie, 
at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to "regulate" 
wages, i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for surplus- 
value making, to lengthen the working-day and to keep the la- 
bourer himself in the normal degree of dependence. This is an 
essential element of the so-called primitive accumulation. 

The class of wage-labourers, which arose in the latter half 
of the 14th century formed then and in the following cen- 
tury only a very small part of the population, well protected 
in its position by the independent peasant proprietary in the 
country and the guild-organisation in the town. In country and 
town master and workmen stood close together socially. The subor- 
dination of labour to capital was only formal — i.e., the mode 



738 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic character. 
Variable capital preponderated greatly over constant. The demand 
for wage-labour grew, therefore, rapidly with every accumulation 
of capital, whilst the supply of wage-labour followed but slowly. 
A large part of the national product, changed later into a fund 
of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the consumption- 
fund of the labourer. 

Legislation on wage-labour (from the first, aimed at the ex- 
ploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always equally 
hostile to him), x is started in England by the Statute of La- 
bourers, of Edward III., 1349. The ordinance of 1350 in France, 
issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. English 
and French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport. 
So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory extension of the 
working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated 
earlier (Chap. X., Section 5). 

The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance 
of the House of Commons. A Tory says naively: "Formerly the 
poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth. 
Next, their wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth 
equally and perhaps more, but in another way." 2 A tariff of wages 
was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day- 
work. The agricultural labourers were to hire themselves out by 
the year, the town ones u in open market." It was forbidden, under 
pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those fixed by the 
statute, but the taking of higher wages was more severely punished 
than the giving them. [So also in Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute 
of Apprentices of Elizabeth, ten days' imprisonment is decreed 
for him that pays the higher wages, but twenty-one days for him 
that receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties 
and authorised the masters to extort labour at the legal rate of 
wages by corporal punishment. All combinations, contracts, oaths, 
&amp;c, by which masons and carpenters reciprocally bound them- 
selves, were declared null and void. Coalition of the labourers is 
treated as a heinous crime from the 14th century to 1825, the 
year of the repeal of the laws against Trades' Unions. The spirit 
of the Statute of Labourers of 1349 and of its offshoots, comes out 



1 "Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences be- 
tween masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the masters," 
says A. Smith. "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete," sayslJnguet. 

2 "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. Lond., 1850, p. 206. He adds 
maliciously: "We were ready enough to interfere for the employer, can 
nothing now be done for the employed?" 



LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 739 

clearly in the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by 
the State, but on no account a minimum. 

In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as 
we know, become much worse. The money wage rose, but not 
in proportion to the depreciation of money and the correspond- 
ing rise in the prices of commodities. Wages, therefore, in reality 
fell. Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in 
force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those "whom 
no one was willing to take into service." By the Statute of Appren- 
tices 5 Elizabeth, c. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to 
fix certain wages and to modify them according to the time of the 
year and the price of commodities. James I. extended these regu- 
lations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and all possible cate- 
gories of workers. 1 George II. extended the laws against coali- 
tions of labourers to manufactures. In the manufacturing period 
par excellence, the capitalist mode of production had become 
sufficiently strong to render legal regulation of wages as impracti- 
cable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling classes were unwilling 
in case of necessity to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. 

Still, 8 George II. forbade a higher day's wage than 2s. 7yd. for 

journeymen tailors in and around London, except in cases of gen- 
eral mourning; still, 13 George III., c. 68, gave the regulation of 
the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still, in 
1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to decide, 
whether the mandates of justices of the peace as to wages held 
good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an act of 



1 From a clause of Statute 2 James I., c. 6, we see that certain cloth- 
makers took upon themselves to dictate, in their capacity of justices of the 
peace, the official tariff of wages in their own shops. In Germany, especially 
after the Thirty Years' War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. 
"The want of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed pro- 
prietors in the depopulated districts. All villagers were forbidden to let rooms 
to single men and women; all the latter were to be reported to the authorities 
and cast into prison if they w T ere unwilling to become servants, even if they 
were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds for the peasants at a 
daily wage, or even buying and selling corn. (Imperial privileges and sanc- 
tions for Silesia, I., 25.) For a whole century in the decrees of the small German 
potentates a bitter cry goes up again and again about the wicked and imper- 
tinent rabble that will not reconcile itself to its hard lot, will not be content 
with the legal wage; the individual landed proprietors are forbidden to pay 
more than the State had fixed by a tariff. And yet the conditions of service 
were at times better after the war than 100 years later; the farm servants of 
Silesia had, in 1652, meat twice a week, w T hilst even in our century, districts 
are known where they have it only three times a year. Further, wages after 
the war were higher than in the following century." (G. Freytag.) 



740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Parliament ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners should 
continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and two Scotch 
acts of 1661 and 1671. How completely in the meantime circum- 
stances had changed, is proved by an occurrence unheard-of before 
in the English Lower House. In that place, where for more than 
400 years laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which 
wages absolutely must not rise, Whitbread in 1796 proposed a 
legal minimum wage for agricultural labourers. Pitt opposed this, 
but confessed that the "condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, 
in 1813, the laws for the regulation of wages were repealed. They 
were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory 
by his private legislation, and could by the poor-rates make up 
the wage of the agricultural labourer to the indispensable mini- 
mum. The provisions of the labour statutes as to contracts between 
master and workman, as to giving notice and the like, which only 
allow of a civil action against the contract-breaking master, but 
on the contrary permit a criminal action against the contract- 
breaking workman, are to this hour (1873) in full force. The barba- 
rous laws against Trades' Unions fell in 1825 before the threatening 
bearing of the proletariat. Despite this, they fell only in part. Cer- 
tain beautiful fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. 
Finally, the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made a pretence 
of removing the last traces of this class of legislation by legal 
recognition of Trades' Unions. But an act of Parliament of the same 
date (an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence, threats, 
and molestation), re-established, in point of fact, the former 
state of things in a new shape. By this Parliamentary escamotage 
the means which the labourers could use in a strike or lock-out 
were withdrawn from the laws common to all citizens, and placed 
under exceptional penal legislation, the interpretation of which 
fell to the masters themselves in their capacity as justices of the 
peace. Two years earlier, the same House of Commons and the 
same Mr. Gladstone in the well-known straightforward fashion 
brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legis- 
lation against the working-class. But this was never allowed to 
go beyond the second reading, and the matter was thus protracted 
until at last the "great Liberal party," by an alliance with the 
Tories, found courage to turn against the very proletariat that 
had carried it into power. Not content with this treachery, the 
"great Liberal party" allowed the English judges, ever complais- 
ant in the service of the ruling classes, to dig up again the earlier 
laws against "conspiracy," and to apply them to coalitions of labour- 
ers. We see that only against its will and under the pressure of the 



LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 741 

masses did the English Parliament give up the laws against 
Strikes and Trades' Unions, after it had itself, for 500 years, 
held, with shameless egoism, the position of a permanent Trades' 
Union of the capitalists against the labourers. 

During the very first storms of the revolution, the French 
bourgeoisie dared to take away from the workers the right of 
association but just acquired. By a decree of June 14, 1791, 
they declared all coalition of the workers as "an attempt against 
liberty and the declaration of the rights of man," punishable by 
a fine of 500 livres, together with deprivation of the rights of an 
active citizen for one year. * This law which, by means of State 
compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour 
within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions 
and changes of dynasties. Even the Reign of Terror left it un- 
touched. It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. 
Nothing is more characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois 
coup d'etat. "Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of the Select 
Committee on this law, "that wages ought to be a little higher 
than they are, ... that they ought to be high enough for him 
that receives them, to be free from that state of absolute dependence 
due to the want of the necessaries of life, and which is almost 
that of slavery," yet the workers must not be allowed to come to 
any understanding about their own interests, nor to act in common 
and thereby lessen their "absolute dependence, which is almost 
that of slavery;" because, forsooth, in doing this they injure "the 
freedom of their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs," 
and because a coalition against the despotism of the quondam 
masters of the corporations is — guess what! — is a restoration 
of { he corporations abolished by the French constitution. 2 



1 Article I. of this law runs: "L'aneantissement de toute espece de corpo- 
rations du meme etat et profession etant Time des bases fondamentales de la 
constitution francaise, il est defendu de les retablir de fait sous quelque pre- 
texte et sous quelque forme que ce soit." Article IV. declares, that if "des ci- 
toyens attaches aux m ernes professions, arts et metiers prenaient des delibe- 
rations, faisaient entre eux des conventions tendantes a reiuser de concert ou 
a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le secours de leur industrie ou de leurs 
travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions ... seront declarees inconsti- 
tutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declaration des droits de 
Thomme, &amp;c"; felony, therefore, as in the old labour-statutes. ("Revolu- 
tions de Paris," Paris, 1791, t. Ill, p. 523.) 

2 Buchez et Roux: "Histoire Parlementaire," t. x., p. 195. 



742 



CHAPTER XXIX 
GENESIS OP THE CAPITALIST FARMER 

Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of 
outlawed proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned them 
into wage-labourers, the disgraceful action of the State which 
employed the police to accelerate the accumulation of capital 
by increasing the degree of exploitation of labour, the question 
remains: whence came the capitalists originally? For the expro- 
priation of the agricultural population creates, directly, none but 
great landed proprietors. As far, however, as concerns the genesis 
of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is 
a slow process evolving through many centuries. The serfs, as 
well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different 
tenures, and were therefore emancipated under very different 
economic conditions. In England the first form of the farmer is 
the bailiff, himself a serf. His position is similar to that of the old 
Roman villicus, only in a more limited sphere of action. During 
the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer, 
whom the landlord provides with seed, cattle and implements. 
His condition is not very different from that of the peasant. Only he 
exploits more wage-labour. Soon he becomes a metayer, a half- 
farmer. He advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord 
the other. The two divide the total product in proportions deter- 
mined by contract. This form quickly disappears in England, to 
give place to the farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed 
by employing wage-labourers, and pays a part of the surplus-prod- 
uct, in money or in kind, to the landlord as rent. So long, during 
the 15th century, as the independent peasant and the farm-labour- 
er working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves 
by their own labour, the circumstances of the farmer, and his 



GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER 743 

field of production, were equally mediocre. The agricultural revo- 
lution which commenced in the last third of the 15th century, 
and continued during almost the whole of the 16th (excepting, 
however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily as it 
impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. x 

The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment 
greatly his stock of cattle, almost without cost, whilst they yielded 
him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. To this, 
was. added in the 16th century, a very important element. At that 
time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for 99 years. 
The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and there- 
fore of money, brought the farmers golden fruit. Apart from all 
the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages. A 
portion of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm. The 
continuous rise in the price of corn, wool, meat, in a word of all 
agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farmer 
without any action on his part, whilst the rent he paid (being 
calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. 2 



1 Harrison in his "Description of England," says "although peradven- 
ture foure pounds of old rent be improved to fortie, toward the end of his 
term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng by him, fiftie or a hundred 
pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines verie small." 

2 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, 
on the different classes of society, see "A Compendious or Briefe Examina- 
tion of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of Divers of our Countrymen in these 
our Days." By W. S., Gentleman. (London 1581.) The dialogue form of this 
work led people for a long time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, 
it was published under his name. Its author is William Stafford. In one place 
the knight reasons as follows: 

"Knight: You, my neighbour, the husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and 
you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves metely well. 
For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise 
in the pryce of your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. But we have 
nothing to sell whereby we might advance ye price there of, to countervaile 
those things that we must buy agayne." In another place the knight asks the 
doctor: "I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. And first, of those that 
ye thinke should have no losse thereby? — Doctor: I mean all those that live 
by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, they sell thereafter. Knight: 
VVhat is the next sort that ye say would win by it? Doctor: Marry, all such as 
have takings of fearmes in their owne manurance [cultivation] at the old 
rent, for where they pay after the olde rate they sell after the newe — that is, 
they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things growing thereof 
deare. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse 
hereby, than these men had profit? Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and 
all other that live either by a stinted rent or stypend, or do not manure 
[cultivation] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling." 



744 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and 
their landlords. No wonder therefore, that England, at the end 
of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, con- 
sidering the circumstances of the time. l 



1 In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords 
during the earlier part of the^middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, 
who by extortion, cheating, &amp;c, swindled himself into a capitalist. These re- 
gisseurs themselves were sometimes noblemen. E.g. "C'est li compte que 
messire Jacques de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besangon rent es-seig- 
neur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoi- 
gne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve jour de decem- 
breMCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de decembre MGCCLX." (Alexis Monteil: 
"Traite de Materiaux Manuscrits etc.," pp. 234, 235.) Already it is evident here 
how in all spheres of social life the lion's share falls to the middleman. In the 
economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators, merchants, 
shopkeepers skim the cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in 
politics the representative is of more importance than the voters, the minis- 
ter than the sovereign; in religion God is pushed into the background by the 
"Mediator," and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the inevitable 
middlemen between the good shepherd and his sheep. In France, as in Eng- 
land, the great feudal tt«rritories were divided Into innumerable small home- 
steads, but under conditions incomparably more unfavourable for the peo- 
ple. During the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. Their number grew 

1 1 
constantly, far beyond 100,000 They paid rents varying from -jx to-=- of the 

product in money or in kind. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs, &amp;.C, according 
to the value and extent of the domains, many of them only containing a 
few acres. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in some degree over the 
dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. The oppression of the agricultural 
population under all these petty tyrants will be understood Monteil says that 
there were once in France 160,000 judges, where to-day, 4,000 tribunals, 
including justices of the peace, suffice. 



745 



CHAPTER XXX 

REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION ON 

INDUSTRY. 

CREATION OF THE HOME-MARKET 

FOR INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL 

THe expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural popular 
tion, intermittent but renewed again and again, supplied, as we 
saw, the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely uncon- 
nected with the corporate guilds and unfettered by them; a for- 
tunate circumstance that makes old A. Anderson (not to be con- 
founded with James Anderson) in his "History of Commerce," 
believe in the direct intervention of Providence. We must still 
pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation. The 
thinning-out of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only 
brought about the crowding together of the industrial proletariat, 
in the way that Geoffroy Saint Hilaire explained the condensation 
of cosmical matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. l 
In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the soil brought 
forth as much or more produce, after as before, because the revo- 
lution in the conditions of landed property was accompanied by 
improved methods of culture, greater co-operation, concentra- 
tion of the means of production, &amp;c, and because not only were the 
agricultural wage-labourers put on the strain more intensely, 2 
but the field of production on which they worked for themselves, 
became more and more contracted. With the setting free of a 
part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former means 
of nourishment were also set free. They were now transformed into 
material elements of variable capital. The peasant, expropriated 
and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from 
liis new master, the industrial capitalist. That which holds good 
of the means of subsistence holds with the raw materials of industry 

1 In his "Notions de Philosophie Naturelle." Paris, 1838. 

2 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasises. 



740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

dependent upon home agriculture. They were transformed into 
an element of constant capital. Suppose, e.g., a part of the West- 
phalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II., all span flax, 
forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other 
part that remained, turned into day-labourers of large farmers. 
At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and 
weaving, in which the men "set free" now work for wages. The 
flax looks exactly as before. Not a fibre of it is changed, but anew 
social soul has popped into its body. It forms now a part of the 
constant capital of the master manufacturer. Formerly divided 
among a number of small producers, who cultivated it themselves 
and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concen- 
trated in the hand of one capitalist, who sets others to spin and 
weave it for him. The extra labour expended in flax-spinning real- 
ised itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, 
or maybe, in Frederick II. 's time, in taxes pour le roi de Prusse. 
It realises itself now in profit for a few capitalists. The spindles 
and looms, formerly scattered over the face of the country, are 
now crowded together in a few great labour-barracks, together 
with the labourers and the raw material. And spindles, looms, 
raw material, are now transformed, from means of independent 
existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding 
them and sucking out of them unpaid labour. Y One does not per- 
ceive, when looking at the large manufactories and the large 
farms, that they have originated from the throwing into one of 
many small centres uf production, and have been built up by the 
expropriation of many small independent producers. Nevertheless, 
the popular intuition was not at fault. In the time of Mirabeau, 
the lion of the Revolution, the great manufactories were still 
called manufactures reunies, workshops thrown into one, as we 
speak of fields thrown into one. Says Mirabeau: "We are only 
paying attention to the grand manufactories, in which hundreds 
of men work under a director and which are commonly called 
manufactures reunies. Those where a very large number of 
labourers work, each separately and on his own account, are 
hardly considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from 
the others. This is a great error, as the latter alone make a really 
important object of national prosperity . . . The large workshop 



1 "Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'honneur de me 
servir, a condition que vous me donnez le peu qui vous reste pour la peine que 
je prends de vous commander." (J.J. Rousseau: "Discours sur l'Economie Po- 
litique.") 



REACTION OP THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 747 

(manufacture reunie) will enrich prodigiously one or two entre- 
preneurs, but the labourers will only be journeymen, paid more or 
less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking. 
In the discrete workshop (manufacture separee), on the contrary, 
no one will become rich, but many labourers will be comfortable; 
the saving and the industrious will be able to amass a little capi- 
tal, to put by a little for a birth of a child, for an illness, for them- 
selves or their belongings. The number of saving and industrious 
labourers will increase, because they will see in good conduct, 
in activity, a means of essentially bettering their condition, and 
not of obtaining a small rise of wages that can never be of any 
importance for the future, and whose sole result is to place men 
in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day... 
The large workshops, undertakings of certain private persons who 
pay labourers from day to day to work for their gain, may be able 
to put these private individuals at their ease, but they will never 
be an object worth the attention of governments. Discrete work- 
shops, for the most part combined with cultivation of smallholdings, 
are the only free ones." * The expropriation and eviction of a part 
of the agricultural population not only set free for industrial capi- 
tal, the labourers, their means of subsistence, and material for 
labour; it also created the home-market. 

In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into 
wage-labourers, and their means of subsistence and of labour into 
material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home- 
market for the latter. Formerly, the peasant family produced the 
means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they themselves, 
for the most part, consumed. These raw materials and means of 
subsistence have now become commodities; the large farmer sells 
them, he finds his market in manufactures. Yarn, linen, coarse 
woollen stuffs-- things whose raw materials had been within 
the reach of every peasant family, had been spun and woven by it 
for its own use — were now transformed into articles of manufac- 
ture, to which the country districts at once served for markets. 
The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans until now 
had found in the numerous small producers working on their own 
account, concentrate themselves now into one great market 



1 Mirabeau, 1. c, t. III., pp. 20-109 passim. That Mirabeau considers the 
separate workshops more economical and productive than the "combined," 
and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under government cultivation, 
is explained by the position at that time of a great part of the continental 
manufactures. 



748 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

provided for by industrial capital. l Thus, hand in hand with the 
expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separa- 
tion from their means of production, goes the destruction of rural 
domestic industry, the process of separation between manufac- 
ture and agriculture. And only the destruction of rural domestic 
industry can give the internal market of a country that extension 
and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires. 
Still the manufacturing period, properly so called, does not, suc- 
ceed in carrying out this transformation radically and complete- 
ly. It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, 
conquers but partially the domain of national production, and 
always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic 
industry of the rural districts as its ultimate basis. If it destroys 
these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it 
calls them up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the prep- 
aration of raw material up to a certain point. It produces, there- 
lore, a new class of small villagers who, while following the 
cultivation of the soil as an accessary calling, find their chief occu- 
pation in industrial labour, the products of which they sell to the 
manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants. 
This is one, though not the chief, cause of a phenomenon which, at 
first, puzzles the student of English history. From the last third 
of the 15th century he finds continually complaints, only inter- 
rupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of capitalist 
farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction 
of the peasantry. On the other hand, he always finds this peasantry 
turning up again, although in diminished number, and always 
under worse conditions. 2 The chief reason is: England is at one 
time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another chiefly a breeder of 
cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent of peasant 
cultivation fluctuates. Modern Industry alone, and finally, sup- 
plies, in machinery, the lasting basis of capitalistic agriculture, 
expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural 



1 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into the yearly cloth- 
ing oi a labourer's family by its ownindustryin the intervals of other work — 
this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to the factory, thence to 
the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have great commercial opera- 
tions, and nominal capital engaged to the amount of twenty times its value.... 
The working-class is thus emersed to support a wretched factory population, 
a parasitical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious commercial, monetary, and 
financial system. (David Urquhart, 1. c, p. 120.) 

2 Cromwell's time forms an exception. So long as the Republic lasted, 
the mass of the English people of all grades rose from the degradation into 
which they had sunk under the Tudors. 



REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 749 

population, and completes the separation between agriculture 
and rural domestic industry, whose roots — spinning and weav- 
ing—it tears up. 1 It therefore also, for the first time, conquers 
for industrial capital the entire home-market. 2 



1 Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen industry has sprung, with 
the introduction of machinery, from manufacture proper and from the destruc- 
tion of rural and domestic industries. "The plough, the yoke, were 'the in- 
vention of gods, and the occupation of heroes;' are the loom, the spindle, the 
distaff, of less noble parentage. You sever the distaff and the plough, the spin- 
dle and the yoke, and you get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two 
hostile nations, agricultural and commercial." (David Urquhart, 1. c, p. 122.) 
But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason, 
that it is trying to turn every other country into a mere agricultural nation, 
whose manufacturer is to be England. He pretends that in this way Turkey has 
been ruined, because "the owners and occupants of land have never been per- 
mitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation of that natural 
alliance between the plough and the loom, the hammer and the harrow." 
("The Slave Trade," p. 125.) According to him, Urquhart himself is one of the 
chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade propaganda 
in the English interest. The best of it is that Carey, a great Russophile by the 
way, wants to prevent the process of separation by that very system of protec- 
tion which accelerates it. 

2 Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin Smith, 
Fawcett, &amp;c, and liberal manufacturers like John Bright &amp; Co., ask the Eng- 
lish landed proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel, Where are our thou- 
sands of freeholders gone? But where do you come from, then? From the 
destruction of those Freeholders. Why don't you ask further, where are the 
independent weavers, spinners, and artisans gone? 



750 



CHAPTER XXXI 
GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 

The genesis of the industrial 1 capitalist did not proceed in such 
a gradual way as that of the farmer. Doubtless many small 
guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even 
wage-labourers, transformed themselves into small capitalists, 
and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage-labour and cor- 
responding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. In the 
infancy of capitalist production, things often happened as in the 
infancy of mediseval towns, where the question, which of the 
escaped serfs should be master and which servant, was in great 
part decided by the earlier or later date of their flight. The snail's 
pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial 
requirements of the new world-market that the great discoveries 
of the end of the 15th century created. But the middle ages had 
handed down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the 
most different economic social formations, and which, before the 
era of the capitalist mode of production, are considered as capi- 
tal quand meme — usurer's capital and merchant's capital. 

"At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the pos- 
session of the capitalist ... he pays the landowner his rent, the 
labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and 
keeps a large, indeed the largest, and a continually augmenting 
share, of the annual produce of labour for himself. The capitalist 
may now be said to be the first owner of all the wealth of the com- 
munity, though no law has conferred on him the right to this prop- 
erty . . . this change has been effected by the taking of interest 
on capital .... and it is not a little curious that all the law-givers 
of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by statutes, viz., statutes 
against usury The power of the capitalist over all the 



1 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricultural. In the "categoric" 
sense the farmer is an industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer. 



GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 751 

wealth of the country is a complete change in the right of property, 
and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?" 1 The author 
should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws. 

The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce 
was prevented from turning into industrial capital, in the country 
by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation. 2 
These fetters vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with 
the expropriation and partial eviction of the country population. 
The new manufactures were established at sea-ports, or at inland 
points beyond the control of the old municipalities and their 
guilds. Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate 
towns against these new industrial nurseries. 

The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, 
enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal popula- 
tion, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, 
the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of 
black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist pro- 
duction. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of 
primitive accumulation. On their heels treads the commercial 
war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. It 
begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes 
giant dimensions in England's Anti-Jacobin War, and is still 
going on in the opium wars against China, &amp;c. 

The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute 
themselves now, more or less in chronological order, particularly 
over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. In Eng- 
land at the end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical 
combination, embracing the colonies, the national debt, the mod- 
ern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. These meth- 
ods depend in part on brute force, e.g., the colonial system. But 
they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and organ- 
ised force of society, to hasten, hothouse fashion, the process of 
transformation of the feudal mode of production into the capital- 
ist mode, and to shorten the transition. Force is the midwife 
of every old society pregnant with a new one. It is itself an eco- 
nomic power. 

Of the Christian colonial system, W. Howitt, a man who 
makes a speciality of Christianity, says: "The barbarities and 



1 "The Natural and Artificial Rights of Property Contrasted." Lond., 
1832, pp. 98-99. Author of the anonymous work: "Th. Hodgskin." 

2 Even as late as 1794, the small cloth-makers of Leeds sent a deputa- 
tion to Parliament, with a petition for a law to forbid any merchant Irom be- 
coming a manufacturer. (Dr. Aikin, 1. c.) 



752 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout 
every region of the world, and upon every people they have been 
able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race, 
however fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy 
and of shame, in any age of the earth." 1 The history of the colo- 
nial administration of Holland — and Holland was the head 
capitalistic nation of the 17th century — "is one of the most 
extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and mean- 
ness." 2 Nothing is more characteristic than their system of steal- 
ing men, to get slaves for Java. The men stealers were trained for 
this purpose. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the 
chief agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. The 
young people stolen, were thrown into the secret dungeons of 
Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships. An 
official report says: "This one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of 
secret prisons, one more horrible than the other, crammed with 
unfortunates, victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, 
forcibly torn from their families." To secure Malacca, the Dutch 
corrupted the Portuguese governor. He let them into the town in 
1641. They hurried at once to his house and assassinated him, to 
"abstain" from the payment of £21,875, the price of his treason. 
Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. 
Banjuwangi, a province of Java, in 1750 numbered over 80,000 
inhabitants, in 1811 only 18,000. Sweet commerce! 

The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, 
besides the political rule in India, the exclusive monopoly of 
the tea-trade, as well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of 
the transport of goods to and from Europe. But the coasting trade 
of India and between the islands, as well as the internal trade of 
India, were the monopoly of the higher employes of the company. 
The monopolies of salt, opium, betel and other commodities, 
were inexhaustible mines of wealth. The employes themselves 
fixed the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. The 
Governor-General took part in this private traffic. His favourites 
received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than 



1 William Howitt: "Colonisation and Christianity: A Popular History 
of the Treatment of the Natives by the Europeans in all their Colonies." 
London, 1838, p. 9. On the treatment of the slaves there is a good compila- 
tion in Charles Comte, "Traite de la Legislation." 3me ed. Bruxelles, 1837. 
This subject one must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of 
itself and of the labourer, wherever it can, without restraint, model the world 
after its own image. 

2 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. -Gov. of that island: "The His- 
tory of Java," Lond., 1817. 



GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 753 

the alchemists, made gold out of nothing. Great fortunes sprang 
up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation went on 
without the advance of a shilling. The trial of Warren Hastings 
swarms with such cases. Here is an instance. A contract for opium 
was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on 
an official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium 
district. Sullivan sold his contract to one Binn for £40,000; 
Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate pur- 
chaser who carried out the contract declared that after all he 
realised an enormous gain. According to one of the lists laid 
before Parliament, the Company and its employes from 1757- 
1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians as gifts. Between 1769 
and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying up 
all the rice and refusing to sell it again, except at fabulous prices. 1 

The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most fright- 
ful in plantation-colonies destined for export trade only, such 
as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, 
such as Mexico and India, that were given over to plunder. 
But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian char- 
acter of primitive accumulation did not belie itself. Those 
sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New England, 
in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on 
every Indian scalp and every captured red-skin: in 1720 a pre- 
mium of £100 on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay 
had proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following prices: 
for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100 (new currency), 
for a male prisoner £105, for women and children prisoners £50, 
for scalps of women and children £50. Some decades later, the 
colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the pious 
pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime. At 
English instigation and for English pay they were tomahawked 
by red-skins. The British Parliament proclaimed blood-hounds and 
scalping as "means that God and Nature had given into its hand." 

The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and 
navigation. The "societies Monopolia" of Luther were power- 
ful levers for concentration of capital. The colonies secured a 
market for the budding manufactures, and, through the mo- 
nopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The treas- 
ures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslave- 



1 In the year 1866 more than a million Hindus died of hunger in the 
province of Orissa alone. Nevertheless, the attempt was made to enrich the 
Indian treasury by the price at which the necessaries of life were sold to 
the starving people. 



754 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



ment, and murder, floated back to the mother-country and were 
there turned into capital. Holland, which first fully developed the 
colonial system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commer- 
cial greatness. It was "in almost exclusive possession of the East 
Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north- 
west of Europe. Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed 
those of any other country. The total capital of the Republic was 
probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put 
together." Giilich forgets to add that by 1648, the people of Holland 
were more over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed than 
those of all the rest of Europe put together. 

To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. 
In the period of manufacture properly so called, it is, on the other 
hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial pre- 
dominance. Hence the preponderant role that the colonial sys- 
tem plays at that time. It was "the strange God" who perched him- 
self on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of Europe, 
and one fine day with a shove and a kick chucked them all of a 
heap. It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim 
of humanity. 

The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose 
origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as early as the middle 
ages, took possession of Europe generally during the manufac- 
turing period. The colonial system with its maritime trade and 
commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it. Thus it first 
took root in Holland. National debts, i.e., the alienation of 
the state — whether despotic, constitutional or republican — 
marked with its stamp the capitalistic era. The only part of the 
so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collec- 
tive possessions of modern peoples is — their national debt. l 
Hence, as a necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a 
nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in debt. Public 
credit becomes the credo of capital. And with the rise of national 
debt-making, want of faith in the national debt takes the place of 
the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven. 

The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of 
primitive accumulation. As with the stroke of an enchanter's 
wand, it endows barren money with the power of breeding and 
thus turns it into capital, without the necessity of its exposing 
itself to the troubles and risks inseparable from its employment 

1 William Cobbett remarks that in England all public institutions are 
designated "royal"; as compensation for this, however, there is the "national" 
debt. 



GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 755 



in industry or even in usury. The state-creditors actually give 
nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed into public bonds, 
easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just 
as so much hard cash would. But further, apart from the class of 
lazy annuitants thus created, and from the improvised wealth of 
the financiers, middlemen between the government and the na- 
tion — as also apart from the tax-farmers, merchants, private 
manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders 
the service of a capital fallen from heaven— the national debt 
has given rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in negotiable 
effects of all kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange 
gambling and the modern bankocracy. 

At their birth the great banks, decorated with national ti- 
tles, were only associations of private speculators, who placed 
themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the 
privileges they received, were in a position to advance money 
to the State. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has 
no more infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock 
of these banks, whose full development dates from the found- 
ing of the Bank of England in 1694. The Bank of England began 
with lending its money to the Government at 8%; at the same 
time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money out of the 
same capital, by lending it again to the public in the form of bank- 
notes. It was allowed to use these notes for discounting bills, 
making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious 
metals. It was not long ere this credit-money, made by the bank 
itself, became the coin in which the Bank of England made its 
loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest 
on the public debt. It was not enough that the bank gave with 
one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even 
whilst receiving, the eternal creditor of the nation down to the 
last shilling advanced. Gradually it became inevitably the recep- 
tacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of grav- 
ity of all commercial credit. What effect was produced on their 
contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, 
financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &amp;c, is proved by the 
writings of that time, e.g., by Bolingbroke's. 1 

With the national debt arose an international credit system, 
which often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumula- 
tion in this or that people. Thus the villainies of the Venetian 

1 :, 3i les Tartares inondaient l' Europe aujourd'hui, il faudrait bien des 
affaires pour leur t'aire entendre ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous.'* 
Montesquieu, "Esprit des lois," t. iv.,p. 33, ed. Londres, 1769. 



756 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

thieving system formed one of the secret bases of the capital- 
wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large 
sums of money. So also was it with Holland and England. 
By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch manufactures 
were far outstripped. Holland had ceased to be the nation prepon- 
derant in commerce and industry. One of its main lines of busi- 
ness, therefore, from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous 
amounts of capital, especially to its great rival England. The 
same thing is going on to-day between England and the United 
States. A great deal of capital, which appears to-day in the United 
States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, 
the capitalised blood of children. 

As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, 
which must cover the yearly payments for interest, &amp;c, the 
modern system of taxation was the necessary complement of 
the system of national loans. The loans enable the government 
to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling 
it immediately, but they necessitate, as a consequence, increased 
taxes. On the other hand, the raising of taxation caused by the 
accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels 
the government always to have recourse to new loans for new 
extraordinary expenses. Modern fiscality, whose pivot is formed 
by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby 
increasing their price), thus contains within itself the germ of 
automatic progression. Over-taxation is not an incident, but 
rather a principle. In Holland, therefore, where this system was 
first inaugurated, the great patriot, De Witt, has in his "Maxims" 
extolled it as the best system for making the wage-labourer sub- 
missive, frugal, industrious, and overburdened with labour. The 
destructive influence that it exercises on the condition of the wage- 
labourer concerns us less however, here, than the forcible expro- 
priation, resulting from it, of peasants, artisans, and in a word, all 
elements of the lower middle-class. On this there are not two opin- 
ions, even among the bourgeois economists. Its expropriating 
efficacy is still further heightened by the system of protection, 
which forms one of its integral parts. 

The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system 
corresponding with it, has played in the capitalisation of wealth 
and the expropriation of the masses, has led many writers, like 
Gobbett, Doubleday and others, to seek in this, Incorrectly, the 
fundamental cause of the misery of the modern peoples. 

The system of protection was an artificial means of manufac- 
turing manufacturers, of expropriating independent labourers, of 



GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 757 

capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of 
forcibly abbreviating the transition from the mediaeval to the 
modern mode of production. The European states tore one an- 
other to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once en- 
tered into the service of the surplus-value makers, did not merely 
lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own 
people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through 
export premiums. They also forcibly rooted out, in their de- 
pendent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did with the 
Irish woollen manufacture. On the continent of Europe, after 
Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. The prim- 
itive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the 
state treasury. "Why," cries Mirabeau, "why go so far to seek the 
cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? 
180,000,000 of debts contracted by the sovereigns!" 1 

Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, com- 
mercial wars, &amp;c, these children of the true manufacturing 
period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modern Indus- 
try. The birth of the latter is heralded by a great slaughter of the 
innocents. Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by 
means of the press-gang. Blase as Sir F. M. Eden is as to the hor- 
rors of the expropriation of the agricultural population from the 
soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his own time; with 
all the self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this process, 
"essential" for establishing capitalistic agriculture and "the due 
proportion between arable and pasture land'* — he does not show, 
however, the same economic insight in respect to the necessity of 
child-stealing and child-slavery for the transformation of manu- 
facturing exploitation into factory exploitation, and the establish- 
ment of the "true relation" between capital and labour-power. He 
says: "It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public 
to consider, whether any manufacture, which, in order to be 
carried on successfully, requires that cottages and workhouses 
should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be em- 
ployed by turns during the greater part of the night and robbed 
of that rest which, though indispensable to all, is most required 
by the young; and that numbers of both sexes, of different ages 
and dispositions, should be collected together in such a manner 
that the contagion of example cannot but lead to profligacy and de- 
bauchery; will add to the sum of individual or national felicity?" 2 



1 Mirabeau, I. c, t. vi., p. 101. 

2 Eden, 1. c, Vol I., Book II., Ch. I., p. 421. 



758 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

"In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and 
more particularly in Lancashire," says Fielden, "the newly- 
invented machinery was used in large factories built on the 
sides of streams capable of turning the water-wheel. Thousands 
of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from 
towns; and Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, compara- 
tively thinly populated and barren, a population was all that she 
now wanted. The small and nimble fingers of little children being 
by very far the most in request, the custom instantly sprang up of 
procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of 
London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Many, many thousands of 
these little, hapless creatures were sent down into the north, being 
from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. The custom was 
for the master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them 
in an "apprentice house" near the factory; overseers were appoint- 
ed to see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children 
to the utmost, because their pay was in proportion to the quantity 
of work that they could exact. Cruelty was, of course, the con- 
sequence. ... In many of the manufacturing districts, but par- 
ticularly, I am afraid, in the guilty county to which I belong 
[Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised 
upon the unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus con- 
signed to the charge of master-manufacturers; they were harassed 
to the brink of death by excess of labour . . . were flogged, fettered 
and tortured in the most exquisite refinement of cruelty; . . . they 
were in many cases starved to the bone while flogged to their work 
and . . . even in some instances . . . were driven to commit sui- 
cide . . . The beautiful and romantic valleys of Derbyshire, Not- 
tinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, 
became the dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. 
The profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only whetted 
the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the man- 
ufacturers had recourse to an expedient that seemed to secure 
to them those profits without any possibility of limit; they began 
the practice of what is termed "night-working," that is, having 
tired one set of hands, by working them throughout the day, they 
had another set ready to go on working throughout the night; 
the day-set getting into the beds that the night-set had just quit- 
ted, and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds 
that the day-set quitted in the morning. It is a common tradition 
in Lancash ire, that the beds never get cold." 1 

1 John Fielden, 1. c, pp. 5, 6. On the earlier infamies of the factory sys- 
tem, cf. Dr. Aikin (1795) 1. c, p. 219, and Gisborne: "Enquiry into the Duties 



GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 759 

With the development of capitalist production during the 
manufacturing period, the public opinion of Europe had lost 
the last remnant of shame and conscience. The nations bragged 
cynically of every infamy that served them as a means to capital- 
istic accumulation. Read, e.g., the naive Annals of Commerce 
of the worthy A. Anderson. Here it is trumpeted forth as a tri- 
umph of English statecraft that at the Peace of Utrecht, England 
extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege 
of being allowed to ply the negro-trade, until then only carried 
on between Africa and the English West Indies, between Africa 
and Spanish America as well. England thereby acquired the right 
of supplying Spanish America until 1743 with 4,800 negroes yearly. 
This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British smug- 
gling. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave-trade. This was its method 
of primitive accumulation. And, even to the present day, Liverpool 
"respectability" is the Pindar of the slave-trade which — com- 
pare the work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — "has coincided 
with that spirit of bold adventure which has characterised the 
trade of Liverpool and rapidly carried it to its present state of 
prosperity; has occasioned vast employment for shipping and 
sailors, and greatly augmented the demand for the manufactures 
of the country" (p. 339). Liverpool employed in the slave-trade, in 
1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in 1770, 96; and in 
1792, 132. 

Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in 
England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to the trans- 
formation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a 
system of commercial exploitation. In fact, the veiled slavery 



of Men," 1795, Vol. II. When the steam-engine transplanted the factories from 
the country waterfalls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious" surplus-val- 
ue maker found the child-material ready to his hand, without being forced 
to seek slaves from the workhouses. When Sir R. Peel (father of the "minis- 
ter of plausibility"), brought in his bill for the protection of children, in 
1815, Francis Horner, lumen of the Bullion Committee and intimate friend 
of Ricardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that with a bank- 
rupt's effects, a gang, if he might use the word, of these children had been 
put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the property. A most 
atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two 
years before, in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in Lon- 
don to one manufacturer, had been transferred to another, and had been 
found by some benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine. Another case 
more horrible had come to hisknowledge while on a[Parliamentary] Committee 
... that not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London 
parish and a Lancashire manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with 
every 20 sound children one idiot should be taken." 



760 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery 
pure and simple in the new world. 1 

Tantse molis erat, to establish the "eternal laws of Nature" 
of the capitalist mode of production, to complete the process of 
separation between labourers and conditions of labour, to trans- 
form, at one pole, the social means of production and subsistence 
into capital, at the opposite pole, the mass of the population into 
wage-labourers, into "free labouring poor," that artificial product 
of modern society. 2 If money, according to Augier, a "comes into 
the world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek," capital 
comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood 
and dirt. 4 



1 In 1790, there were in the English West Indies ten slaves for one free 
man, in the French fourteen forone, in the Dutch twenty-three for one. (Hen- 
ry Brougham: "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the European Powers." 
Edin. 1803, vol. II., p. 74.) 

2 The phrase, "labouring poor," is found in English legislation from the 
moment when the class of wage-labourers becomes noticeable. This term is 
used in opposition, on the one hand, to the "idle poor," beggars, etc., on the 
other to those labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors 
of their own means of labour. From the Statute Book it passed into Political 
Economy, and was handed down by Culpeper, J. Child, etc., to Adam Smith 
aod Eden. After this, one can judge of the good faith of the "execrable politi 
cal cant-monger," Edmund Burke, when he called the expression, "labouring 
poor,"— "execrable political cant." This sycophant who, in the pay of the Eng- 
lish oligarchy, played the romantic laudator temporis acti against the 
French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American Colonies, at the 
beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the 
English oligarchy, was an out andout vulgar bourgeois. "The lawsof commerce 
are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God." (E. Burke, 1. c, pp. 
31 , 32.) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always sold 
himself in the best market. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, 
during his liberal time, is to be found in the writings of the Rev. Mr. Tucker. 
Tucker was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an honourable man and a 
competent political economist. In face of the infamous cowardice of character 
that reigns to-day, and believes most devoutly in "the laws of commerce," 
it is our bounderi duty again and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ 
from their successors in one thing— talent. 

3 Marie Augier: "Du Credit Public." Paris, 1842. 

4 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, 
and to be timid, which is very true; but this is very incompletely stating the 
question. Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit, just as Nature was 
formerly said to abhor a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. 
A certain 10 per cent, will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent, cer- 
tain will produce eagerness; 50 per cent., positive audapity; 100 per cent, 
will make it ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent., and there is 
not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the 
chance of its owner being hanged. If turbulence and strife will bring a 
profit, it will freely encourage both. Smuggling and the slave-trade have 
amply proved all that is here stated." (T. J. Dunning, 1. c, pp 35, 36.) 



761 



CHAPTER XXXir 

HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 

WhaT does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e. , its histori- 
cal genesis, resolve itself into? In so far as it is not immediate 
transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-labourers, and 
therefore a mere change of form, it only means the expropriation 
of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private prop- 
erty based on the labour of its owner. Private property, as the 
antithesis to social, collective property, exists only where 
the means of labour and the external conditions of labour 
belong to private individuals. But according as these private 
individuals are labourers or not labourers, private property has 
a different character. The numberless shades, that it at first 
sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages lying 
between these two extremes. The private property of the labourer 
in his means of production is the foundation of petty industry, 
whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, 
again, is an essential condition for the development of 
social production and of the free individuality of the labourer 
himself. Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under 
slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence. But it 
flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate 
classical form, only where the labourer is the private owner 
of his own means of labour set in action by himself: the peasant 
of the land which he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which 
he handles as a virtuoso. This mode oi production pre-sup- 
poses parcelling of the soil, and scattering of the other 
means of production. As it excludes the concentration of these 



762 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

means of production, so also it excludes co-operation, divi- 
sion of labour within each separate process of produc- 
tion, the control over, and the productive application of 
the forces of Nature by society, and the free develop- 
ment of the social productive powers. It is compatible only with 
a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and 
more or less primitive bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pec- 
queur rightly says, "to decree universal mediocrity." At a cer- 
tain stage of development it brings forth the material agencies 
for its own dissolution. From that moment new forces and new 
passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organ- 
isation fetters them and keeps them down. It must be annihi- 
lated; it is annihilated. Its annihilation, the transformation of 
the individualised and scattered means of production into so- 
cially concentrated ones, of the pigmy property of the many into 
the huge property of the few, the expropriation of the great mass 
of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence, and 
from the means of labour, this fearful and painful expropriation 
of the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capi- 
tal. It comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have 
passed in review only those that have been epoch-making as meth- 
ods of the primitive accumulation of capital. The expropriation 
of the immediate producers was accomplished with merciless 
Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most in- 
famous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odi 
ous. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to 
say, on the fusing together of the isolated, independent 
labouring-individual with the conditions of his labour, is 
supplanted by capitalistic private property, which rests on 
exploitation of the nominally free labour of others, i.e., on 
wage-labour. 1 

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently de 
composed the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the la- 
bourers are turned into proletarians, their means of labour into 
capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of production stands on 



1 "Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la so- 
ciete... nous tendons a separer toute espece de propriety d'avec toute espece 
de travail." (Sismondi; "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Polit." t. II., 
p. 434.) 



HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 763 

its own feet, then the further socialisation of labour and further 
transformation of the land and other means of production into 
socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, 
as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes 
a new form. That which is now to be expropriated is no longer 
the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting 
many labourers. This expropriation is accomplished by the action 
of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the 
centralisation of capital. One capitalist always kills many. Hand 
in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many 
capitalists by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale, the co- 
operative form of the labour-process, the conscious technical 
application of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil, the 
transformation of the instruments of labour into instruments of 
labour only usable in common, the economising of all means of 
production by their use as the means of production of combined, 
socialised labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of 
the world-market, and with this, the international character of 
the capitalistic regime. Along with the constantly diminishing 
number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolise all 
advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass 
of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but 
with this too grows the revolt of the working-class, a class always 
increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the 
very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. 
The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of pro- 
duction, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under 
it. Centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of 
labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with 
their capitalist integument. Thus integument is burst asunder. 
The knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators 
are expropriated. 

The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capi- 
talist mode of production, produces capitalist private property. 
This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded 
on the labour of the proprietor. But capitalist production begets, 
with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It is 
the negation of negation. This does not re-establish private prop- 
erty for the producer, but gives him individual property based 
on the acquisitions of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation 
and the possession in common of the land and of the means of pro- 
duction, 



764 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The transformation of scattered private property, arising 
from individual labour, into capitalist private property is, nat- 
urally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and 
difficult, than the transformation of capitalistic private prop- 
erty, already practically resting on socialised production, into 
socialised property. In the former case, we had the expropriation 
of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in the latter, we have 
the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people. l 



1 The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bour- 
geoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition, by their 
revolutionary combination, due to association. The development of Modern 
Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet, the very foundation on which 
the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, 
therefore, produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the vic- 
tory of the proletariat are equally inevitable... Of all the classes, that stand 
face to face with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat alone is a really revo- 
lutionary class. The other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern 
Industry, the proletariat is its special and essential product... The lower mid- 
dle-classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, 
all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence 
as fractions of the middle-ciass ... they are reactionary, for they try to roll 
back the wheel of history. Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, "Manifest der 
Kommunistischen Partei," London, 1848, pp. 9, 11. 



765 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 1 

Political Economy confuses on principle two very different 
kinds of private property, of which one rests on the producers' 
own labour, the other on the employment of the labour of 
others. .It forgets that the latter not only is the direct antithesis 
of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. In Western 
Europe, the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive 
accumulation is more or less accomplished. Here the capitalist 
regime has either directly conquered the whole domain of national 
production, or, where economic conditions are less developed, it, 
at least, indirectly controls those strata of society which, though 
belonging to the antiquated mode of production, continue to exist 
side by side with it in gradual decay. To this ready-made world 
of capital, the political economist applies the notions of law and 
of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all the more 
anxious zeal and all the greater unction, the more loudly the facts 
cry out in the face of his ideology. It is otherwise in the colonies. 
There the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with 
the resistance of the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions 
of labour, employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the 
capitalist. The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed 
economic systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle 
between them. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the 
mother-country, he tries to clear out of his way by force, the modes 
of production and appropriation, based on the independent labour 
of the producer. The same interest, which compels the sycophant 
of capital, the political economist, in the mother-country, to pro- 
claim the theoretical identity of the capitalist mode of production 
with its contrary, that same interest compels him in the colonies 
to make a clean breast of it, and to proclaim aloud the antagonism 



1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgin soils, colonised by free immi- 
grants. The United States are, speaking economically, still only a Colony of 
Europe. Besides, to this category belong also such old plantations as those in 
which the abolition of slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions. 



7(56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

of the two modes of production. To this end he proves how the 
development of the social productive power of labour, co-opera- 
tion, division of labour, use of machinery on a large scale, &amp;c, 
are impossible without the expropriation of the labourers, and 
the corresponding transformation of their means of production 
into capital. In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he 
seeks for artificial means to ensure the poverty of the people. 
Here his apologetic armour crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten 
touchwood. It is the great merit of E. G. Wakefield to have dis- 
covered, not anything new about the Colonies, l but to have dis- 
covered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist 
production in the mother-country. As the system of protection at 
its origin 2 attempted to manufacture capitalists artificially in 
the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonisation theory, which 
England tried for a time to enforce by Acts of Parliament, at- 
tempted to effect the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies. 
This he calls "systematic colonisation." 

First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, 
property in money, means of subsistence, machines, and other 
means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist 
if there be wanting the correlative— the wage-worker, the other 
man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. He dis- 
covered that capital is not a thing, but a social relation between 
persons, established by the instrumentality of things. 3 Mr. Peel, 
he moans, took with him from England to Swan River, West 
Australia, means of subsistence and of production to the amount 
of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 
3,000 persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. 
Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was left without a serv- 
ant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river." 4 Unhappy 
Mr. Peel who provided for everything except the export of English 
modes of production to Swan River! 



1 Wakefield's tew glimpses on the subject of Modern Colonisation are 
fully anticipated by Mirabeau Pere, the physiocrat, and even much earlier 
by English economists. 

8 Later, it became a temporary necessity in the international competi- 
tive struggle. But, whatever its motive, the consequences remain the same. 

3 "A negro is a negro. In certain circumstances he becomes a slave. A 
mule is a machine for spinning cotton. Only under certain circumstances does 
it become capital. Outside these circumstances, it is no more capital than 
gold is intrinsically money, or sugar is the price of sugar .... Capital is a so- 
cial relation of production. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl 
Marx, "Lohnarbeit und Kapital." A. Rh. Z No. 266, April 7, 1849.) 

4 E. G. Wakefield: "England and America," vol. ii., p. 33. 



THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 767 

For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wake- 
field, two preliminary remarks: We know that the means of pro- 
duction and subsistence, while they remain the property of the 
immediate producer, are not capital. They become capital, 
only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time 
as means of exploitation and subjection of the labourer. But 
this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in the head 
of the political economist, to their material substance, that he 
christens them capital under all circumstances, even when they 
are its exact opposite. Thus is it with Wakefield. Further: the 
splitting up of the means of production into the individual prop- 
erty of many independent labourers, working on their own ac- 
count, he calls equal division of capital. It is with the political 
economist as with the feudal jurist. The latter stuck on to pure 
monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law. 

"If," says Wakefield, "all the members of the society are sup- 
posed to possess equal portions of capital ... no man would 
have a motive for accumulating more capital than he could use 
with his own hands. This is to some extent the case in new Ameri- 
can settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the 
existence of a class of labourers for hire." 1 So long, therefore, as 
the labourer can accumulate for himself — and this he can do 
so long as he remains possessor of his means of production- 
capitalist accumulation and the capitalistic mode of production 
are impossible. The class of wage-labourers, essential to these, 
is wanting. How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of 
the labourer from his conditions of labour, i.e., the co-existence 
of capital and wage-labour, brought about? By a social contract 
of a quite original kind. "Mankind have adopted a . . . simple con- 
trivance for promoting the accumulation of capital," which, of 
course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination as 
the sole and final end of their existence: "they have divided them- 
selves into owners of capital and owners of labour .... This 
division was the result of concert and combination." 2 In one word: 
the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honour of the "accu- 
mulation of capital." Now, one would think, that this instinct of 
self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in 
the Colonies, where alone exist the men and conditions that 
could turn a social contract from a dream to a reality. But why, 
then, should "systematic colonisation" be called in to replace its 
opposite, spontaneous, unregulated colonisation? But— but — 

1 1. c, p. 17. 

2 1. c, vol. i., p. 18. 



768 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

"In the Northern States of the American Union, it may be doubted 
whether so many as a tenth of the people would fall under the 
description of hired labourers .... In England. . . the labouring 
class compose the bulk of the people." 1 Nay, the impulse to self- 
expropriation, on the part of labouring humanity, for the glory 
of capital, exists so little, that slavery, according to Wakefield 
himself, is the sole natural basis of Colonial wealth. His system- 
atic colonisation is a mere pis aller, since he unfortunately has 
to do with free men, not with slaves. "The first Spanish settlers in 
Saint Domingo did not obtain labourers from Spain. But, with- 
out labourers, their capital must have perished, or, at least, 
must soon have been diminished to that small amount which each 
individual could employ with his own hands. This has actually 
occurred in the last Colony founded by Englishmen— the Swan 
River Settlement— where a great mass of capital, of seeds, imple- 
ments, and cattle, has perished for want of labourers to use it, and 
where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can 
employ with his own hands." 2 

We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people 
from the soil forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production. 
The essence of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this — 
that the bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler 
on it therefore can turn part of it into his private property and 
individual means of production, without hindering the later set- 
tlers in the same operation. 3 This is the secret both of the pros- 
perity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice — opposition to 
the establishment of capital. "Where land is very cheap and all 
men are free, where every one who so pleases can easily obtain 
a piece of land for himself, not only is labour very dear, as re- 
spects the labourer's share of the produce, but the difficulty is to 
obtain combined labour at any price." 4 

As in the colonies the separation of the labourer from the 
conditions of labour and their root, the soil, does not yet exist, 
or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does 
the separation of agriculture from industry exist, nor the de- 
struction of the household industry of the peasantry. Whence 
then is to come the internal market for capital? "No part of the 
population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting slaves 

1 1 c, pp. 42, 43, 44. 

2 I. c, vol. ii. f p. 5. 

3 "Land, to be an element of colonisation, must not only be waste, but it 
mu=l be public property, liable to be converted into private property." 
(1 c Vol II., p 125 ) 

4 L. c, Voi I., i. 247. 



THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 769 

and their employers who combine capital and labour in particular 
works. Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, follow many other 
occupations. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they 
use is commonly made by themselves. They frequently build 
their own houses, and carry to market, at whatever distance, the 
produce of their own industry. They are spinners and weavers; 
they make soap and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and 
clothes for their own use. In America the cultivation of land is 
often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shop- 
keeper." 1 With such queer people as these, where is the "field of 
abstinence" for the capitalists? 

The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this— 
that it not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as wage- 
worker, but produces always, in proportion to the accumulation 
of capital, a relative surplus-population of wage-workers. Thus 
the law of supply and demand of labour is kept in the right rut, 
the oscillation of wages is penned within limits satisfactory to 
capitalist exploitation, and lastly, the social dependence of the 
labourer on the capitalist, that indispensable requisite, is secured; 
an unmistakable relation of dependence, which the smug polit- 
ical economist, at home, in the mother-country, can transmogrify 
into one of free contract between buyer and seller, between equally 
independent owners of commodities, the owner of the commodity 
capital and the owner of the commodity labour. But in the colo- 
nies this pretty fancy is torn asunder. The absolute population 
here increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, 
because many labourers enter this world as ready-made adults, 
and yet the labour-market is always understocked. The law of 
the supply and demand of labour falls to pieces. On the one hand, 
the old world constantly throws in capital, thirsting after exploi- 
tation and "abstinence"; on the other, the regular reproduction of 
the wage-labourer as wage-labourer comes into collision with im- 
pediments the most impertinent and in part invincible. What be- 
comes of the production of wage-labourers, supernumerary in 
proportion to the accumulation of capital? The wage-worker of to- 
day is to-morrow an independent peasant, or artisan, working 
for himself. He vanishes from the labour-market, but not into 
the workhouse. This constant transformation of the wage-labourers 
into independent producers, who work for themselves instead 
of for capital, and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist 
gentry, reacts in its turn very perversely on the conditions of the 



1. c, pp. 21, 22. 



770 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

labour-market. Not only does the degree of exploitation of the 
wage-labourer remain indecently low. The wage-labourer loses 
into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the 
sentiment of dependence on the abstemious capitalist. Hence all 
the inconveniences that our E.G. Wakefield pictures so doughtily, 
so eloquently, so pathetically. 

The supply of wage-labour, he complains, is neither constant, 
nor regular, nor sufficient. "The supply of labour is always, not 
only small, but uncertain." x "Though the produce divided between 
the capitalist and the labourer be large, the labourer takes so 
great a share that he soon becomes a capitalist. . . Few, even 
of those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great 
masses of wealth." 2 The labourers most distinctly decline to 
allow the capitalist to abstain from the payment of the greater 
part of their labour. It avails him nothing, if he is so cunning as 
to import from Europe, with his own capital, his own wage- 
workers. They soon "cease ... to be labourers for hire; they . . . 
become independent landowners, if not competitors with their 
former masters in the labour-market." 3 Think of the horror! The 
excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his 
own good money, his own competitors! The end of the world has 
come! No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all dependence 
and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers 
in the colonies. On account of the high wages, says his disciple, 
Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent desire for cheaper 
and more subservient labourers — for a class to whom the capi- 
talist might dictate terms, instead of being dictated to by them 
... In ancient civilised countries the labourer, though free, is 
by a law of Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this depend- 
ence must be created by artificial means." 4 



1 1. c. Vol. II., p. 116. 

2 1. c, Vol. I., p. 131. 

3 1. c, Vol. II., p. 5. 

4 Merivale, 1. c, Vol. II., pp. 235-314 passim. Even the mild, Free- 
trade, vulgar economist, Molinari, says: "Dans les colonies ou 1'esclavage a 
ete aboli sans que le travail force se trouvait remplace par une quantite equi- 
valente de travail libre, on a vu s'operer la contre-partfe du fait qui se realise 
tous les jours sous nos yeux. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur 
tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger d'eux des salaires hors de toute pro- 
portion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. Les planteurs, 
ae pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour couvrir la hausse de 
salaire, ont 6te obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite 
sur leurs capitaux memes. Une foule de planteurs ont 6te mines de la sorte, 
d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers pour echapper a une ruine imminente... Sans 
doute, il vaut mieuxvoir perir bes accumulations de capitaux que des g6ne- 



THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 771 

What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this 
unfortunate state of things in the colonies? A "barbarising tend- 
ency of dispersion" of producers and national wealth. * The par- 
celling-out of the means of production among innumerable owners, 
working on their own account, annihilates, along with the cen- 
tralisation of capital, all the foundations of combined labour. 
Every long-winded undertaking, extending over several years 
and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being 
carried out. In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a mo- 
ment, for the working-class constitutes its living appurtenance, 
always in excess, always at disposal. But in the colonies! Wake- 
field tells an extremely doleful anecdote. He was talking with 
some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the 
immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment 
of "supernumerary" labourers. "Our capital," says one of the charac- 
ters in the melodrama, "was ready for many operations which 
require a considerable period of time for their completion; but we 
could not begin such operations with labour which, we knew, would 
soon leave us. If we had been sure of retaining the labour of such 
emigrants, we should have been glad to have engaged it at once, 
and for a high price: and we should have engaged it, even though 
we had been sure it would leave us, provided we had been sure 
of a fresh supply whenever we might need it." 2 

After Wakefield has contrasted the English capitalist agri- 
culture and its "combined" labour with the scattered cultivation 
of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the 
reverse of the medal. He depicts the mass of the American people 
as well-to-do, independent, enterprising and comparatively cul- 
tured, whilst "the English agricultural labourer is a miserable 
wretch, a pauper. . . In what country, except North America 
and some new colonies, do the wages of free labour employed in 
agriculture, much exceed a bare subsistence for the labourer? . . . 

rations d'hommes [how generous of Mr. Molinari!]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas 
mieux que ni les uns ni les autres perissent?" (Molinari, 1. c, pp. 51, 52.) Mr. 
Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten commandments, of 
Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the 
"entrepreneur" can cut down the labourer's legitimate part, and in the West 
Indies, the labourer can cut down the entrepreneur's? And what, if you 
please, is this "legitimate part," which on your own showing the capitalist 
in Europe daily neglects to pay? Over yonder, in the colonies where the 
labourers are so "simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari feels a 
strong itching to set the law of supply and demand, that works elsewhere 
automatically, on the right road by means of the police. 

1 Wakefield, 1. c, Vol. II., p. 52. 

2 1. c, pp. 191, 192. 



772 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 



Undoubtedly, farm-horses in England, being a valuable property, 
are better fed than English peasants." 1 But, never mind, na- 
tional wealth is, once again, by its very nature, identical 
with misery of the people. 

How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colo- 
nies? If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil from pub- 
lic into private property, they would destroy certainly the root 
of the evil, but also — the colonies. The trick is how to kill two 
birds with one stone. Let the Government put upon the virgin 
soil an artificial price, independent of the law of supply and 
demand, a price that compels the immigrant to work a long 
time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy 
land, and turn himself into an independent peasant. 2 The 
fund resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively pro- 
hibitory for the wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from 
the wages of labour by violation of the sacred law of supply and 
demand, the Government is to employ, on the other hand, in 
proportion as it grows, to import have-nothings from Europe into 
the colonies, and thus keep the wage-labour market full for the 
capitalists. Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux 
dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. This is the great secret 
of "systematic colonisation." By this plan, Wakefield cries in 
triumph, "the supply of labour must be constant and regular, be- 
cause, first, as no labourer would be able to procure land until 
he had worked for money, all immigrant labourers, working for a 
time for wages and in combination, would produce capital for the 
employment of more labourers; secondly, because every labourer 
who left off working for wages and became a landowner, would, 
by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh labour to 
the colony." 3 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, 
of course, be a "sufficient price" — i.e., so high "as to prevent 
the labourers from becoming independent landowners until 
others had followed to take their place." 4 This "sufficient price for 
the land" is nothing but a euphemistic circumlocution for the ran- 



1 1. c, Vol. 1., pp. 47, 246. 

2 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grace a l'appropriation du sol et des capitaux que 
rhomme, qui n'a que ses bras, trouve de l'occupation, et se fait un revenu... 
c'est au contraire, grace a Impropriation individuelle du sol qu'il se 
trouve des houimes n'ayant que leurs bras.... Quand vous mettez un homme 
dans le vide, vous vous emparez de l'atmospbere. Ainsi faMtes-vous, quand 
vous vous emparez du sol.... C'est le mettre dans le vide de richesses, pour ue 
le laisser vivre qu'a votre volonte." (Colins, I. c, t. III., pp 268-271, passim.) 

3 Wakefield, .1 c, Vol. 11., p 192. 
a 1 c, p 45. 



THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 773 

som which the labourer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire 
from the wage-labour market to the land. First, he must create 
for the capitalist "capital," with which the latter may be able 
to exploit more labourers; then he must place, at his own expense, 
a locum tenens on the labour-market, whom the Government for- 
wards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the capi- 
talist. 

It is very characteristic that the English Government for 
years practised this method of "primitive accumulation," pre- 
scribed by Mr. Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. 
The fiasco was, of course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's 
Bank Act. The stream of emigration was only diverted from the 
English colonies to the United States. Meanwhile, the advance 
of capitalistic production in Europe, accompanied by increasing 
Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's recipe superfluous. 
On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream of men, year 
after year driven upon America, leaves behind a stationary sedi- 
ment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration 
from Europe throwing men on the labour-market there more rapid- 
ly than the wave of emigration westwards can wash them away. 
On the other hand, the American Civil War brought in its train 
a colossal national debt, and, with it, pressure of taxes, the rise 
of the vilest financial aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part 
of the public land on speculative companies for the exploitation of 
railways, mines, &amp;c, in brief, the most rapid centralisation of 
capital. The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the prom- 
ised land for emigrant labourers. Capitalistic production advances 
there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages 
and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being 
brought down to the normal European level. The shameless lav- 
ishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and capitalists 
by the Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield, has 
produced, especially in Australia, * in conjunction with the stream 
of men that the gold-diggings attract, and with the competition 
that the importation of English commodities causes even to the 
smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus labouring population," 
so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the 



1 As soon as Australia became her own law-giver, she passed, oi course, 
laws favourable to the settlers, but the squandering of the land, already ac- 
complished by the English Government, stands in the way. "The first and main 
object at which the new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities 
for the settlement of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria," by the Hon. 
G. G. Duffy, Minister of Public Lands. Lond., 1862.) 



774 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

Australian labour-market," and prostitution in some places there 
flourishes as wantonly as in the London Haymarket. 

However, we are not concerned here with the condition of 
the colonies. The only thing that interests us is the secret discov- 
ered in the new world by the Political Economy of the old world, 
and proclaimed on the house-tops: that the capitalist mode of 
production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private 
property, have for their fundamental condition the annihilation 
of self-earned private property; in other words, the expropriation 
of the labourer. 
﻿  A CONTRIBUTION TO
  THE CRITIQUE OF
  POLITICAL ECONOMY

  BY
  KARL MARX

  Translated from the Second German Edition by N. I. Stone

  With an Appendix Containing Marx’s Introduction to the Critique
  Recently Published among His Posthumous Papers

  CHICAGO
  CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY

  Copyright, 1904
  By the International Library Publishing Co.




TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.


The present translation has been made from the second edition of the
“Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie,” published by Karl Kautsky in
1897 with slight changes from the original edition of 1859; changes
that had been indicated by Marx on the margins of his own copy of the
book.

As will be seen from the author’s preface, the work was originally
issued as the first instalment of a complete treatise of political
economy. As he went on with his work, however, Marx modified his plans
and eight years after the appearance of the “Zur Kritik” he published
the first volume of his Capital, whose scope was intended to cover the
entire field of political economy.

The plan to which Marx alludes in the preface to the present work
was thus abandoned in its formal aspects, but not in substance. The
subject matter treated here was reproduced or rather “summarized,” as
Marx himself puts it, in Capital. But that was done in so far as was
necessary to secure continuity of treatment. On the other hand, many
important matters are treated here more thoroughly than in Capital,
especially the part devoted to the discussion of money. This, as well
as the chapters on the history of the theories of value and of money,
which do not appear in Capital, make “Zur Kritik” a work practically
complete in itself.

The recent silver agitation in this country shows how timely and useful
this work still is, though written nearly half a century ago. That a
great part of the working-men employed in the cities were not carried
away by the Democratic-Populist agitation in 1896 and 1900 is probably
due in a greater measure than is commonly realized to the direct
and indirect influence of Marx, whose economic teachings guided the
socialists in their counter agitation. And since the conditions which
once gave rise to a demand for an inflated currency have by no means
disappeared beyond a possibility of return, this book has a wide field
before it, outside of the library of the college and of the student of
economics, which the author’s name and prestige with the working class
insures for it.

There is another reason, if any need be given why this book should
have been translated into English. Marx’s preface to the present work
contains the classic formulation of his historico-philosophic theory
known as the Materialistic Interpretation of History. This theory,
which until recently was entertained almost exclusively by socialist
writers and was hardly heard of outside of socialist circles in English
speaking countries, is at last receiving not only due recognition but
sympathetic appreciation at the hands of men of science.[1] It is
rather a significant coincidence that the work which for the first
time clearly formulated the law governing social evolution should have
seen the light of day in the same year in which Darwin gave to the
world his theory of organic evolution. And as the latter had to fight
its way to recognition in the teeth of religious prejudices, so has the
recognition of the former been retarded by even more powerful social
and political prejudices.

The Introduction to the Critique of Political Economy which is added
as a supplement to this book is for the first time published in book
form in any language. It was written by Marx in 1857, but for reasons
explained by him in the preface was not published and in fact was never
finished by him, since according to his changed plans it would have
fitted more into the last volume of Capital which was to contain a
history of political economy. The introduction has been published but
lately in the form of a magazine article by Karl Kautsky, editor of the
Neue Zeit and literary executor of Karl Marx.

A few explanations are here in order with reference to the work of
translation. No one is more keenly alive to the shortcomings of the
English rendering of the original than the translator himself. While
fully conscious that the translation might be greatly improved, he
has at times deliberately sacrificed literary finish to closeness to
the original. It will be found that many passages have been rendered
more clear and concise in Capital in which, according to Marx’s own
statement in the preface to that work, they were much simplified and
popularized. The Hegelian phraseology is more in evidence in the
present work rendering translation a more difficult task. Yet for
that very reason it seemed particularly desirable to give to English
speaking readers as close a version of the original as was possible. In
the few cases where certain passages from this work were reproduced by
Marx in Capital, the translation of the latter by Moore and Aveling was
freely drawn upon with slight modifications here and there.

About the only liberty taken with Marx’s terminology has been in
the case of the word “bürgerlich.” Marx speaks here of “bürgerliche
Produktion” and “bürgerlicher Reichthum” and “bürgerliche Arbeit” where
eight years later he used in corresponding passages in Capital the word
“kapitalistische.” As the English speaking reader is more accustomed to
hear of the “capitalist” system of production than of the “bourgeois”
system of production, etc., the translator considered Marx’s own change
of this term within a few years from the publication of “Zur Kritik”
a sufficient justification for rendering the word “bürgerlich” into
“capitalistic” wherever it seemed more likely to carry the meaning home
to the reader.

In view of the fact that the work is likely to be read in wide circles
it was thought desirable to translate the numerous quotations from
Italian, Greek, Latin and French writers, the translation being given
side by side with the original quotation. All English citations given
by Marx in German have been restored from the original sources, which
necessitated the use of four libraries, the Astor and the Columbia
University libraries in New York, the Congressional Library in
Washington, and the private library of Professor Seligman to whose
kindness the translator is indebted for the permission to use rare
works of the seventeenth century quoted by Marx. Several of Marx’s
references to the pages of the books quoted by him have been found to
be wrong and therefore differ here from those given in the original.
In two or three cases where the original English citations could not
be found they were retranslated from German with the quotation marks
omitted.

This statement would be incomplete if the translator failed to mention
the helpful participation in this work by his wife whose share in the
translation is equal to his own.

New York, October, 1903.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE.


I consider the system of bourgeois economy in the following order:
_Capital_, _landed property_, _wage labor_; _state_, _foreign trade_,
_world market_. Under the first three heads I examine the conditions
of the economic existence of the three great classes, which make up
modern bourgeois society; the connection of the three remaining heads
is self evident. The first part of the first book, treating of capital,
consists of the following chapters: 1. Commodity; 2. Money, or simple
circulation; 3. Capital in general. The first two chapters form the
contents of the present work. The entire material lies before me in the
form of monographs, written at long intervals not for publication, but
for the purpose of clearing up those questions to myself, and their
systematic elaboration on the plan outlined above will depend upon
circumstances.

I omit a general introduction which I had prepared, as on second
thought any anticipation of results that are still to be proven, seemed
to me objectionable, and the reader who wishes to follow me at all,
must make up his mind to pass from the special to the general. On the
other hand, some remarks as to the course of my own politico-economic
studies may be in place here.

The subject of my professional studies was jurisprudence, which I
pursued, however, in connection with and as secondary to the studies
of philosophy and history. In 1842-43, as editor of the “Rheinische
Zeitung,” I found myself embarrassed at first when I had to take part
in discussions concerning so-called material interests. The proceedings
of the Rhine Diet in connection with forest thefts and the extreme
subdivision of landed property; the official controversy about the
condition of the Mosel peasants into which Herr von Schaper, at that
time president of the Rhine Province, entered with the “Rheinische
Zeitung;” finally, the debates on free trade and protection, gave
me the first impulse to take up the study of economic questions. At
the same time a weak, quasi-philosophic echo of French socialism and
communism made itself heard in the “Rheinische Zeitung” in those days
when the good intentions “to go ahead” greatly outweighed knowledge of
facts. I declared myself against such botching, but had to admit at
once in a controversy with the “Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung” that my
previous studies did not allow me to hazard an independent judgment as
to the merits of the French schools. When, therefore, the publishers
of the “Rheinische Zeitung” conceived the illusion that by a less
aggressive policy the paper could be saved from the death sentence
pronounced upon it, I was glad to grasp that opportunity to retire to
my study room from public life.

The first work undertaken for the solution of the question that
troubled me, was a critical revision of Hegel’s “Philosophy of Law”;
the introduction to that work appeared in the “Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher,” published in Paris in 1844. I was led by my studies to
the conclusion that legal relations as well as forms of state could
neither be understood by themselves, nor explained by the so-called
general progress of the human mind, but that they are rooted in the
material conditions of life, which are summed up by Hegel after the
fashion of the English and French of the eighteenth century under
the name “civic society;” the anatomy of that civic society is to
be sought in political economy. The study of the latter which I had
taken up in Paris, I continued at Brussels whither I emigrated on
account of an order of expulsion issued by Mr. Guizot. The general
conclusion at which I arrived and which, once reached, continued to
serve as the leading thread in my studies, may be briefly summed up as
follows: In the social production which men carry on they enter into
definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage
of development of their material powers of production. The sum total
of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure
of society―the real foundation, on which rise legal and political
superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production in material life determines the
general character of the social, political and spiritual processes
of life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines
their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the
material forces of production in society come in conflict with the
existing relations of production, or―what is but a legal expression
for the same thing―with the property relations within which they
had been at work before. From forms of development of the forces
of production these relations turn into their fetters. Then comes
the period of social revolution. With the change of the economic
foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly
transformed. In considering such transformations the distinction should
always be made between the material transformation of the economic
conditions of production which can be determined with the precision
of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or
philosophic―in short ideological forms in which men become conscious of
this conflict and fight it out. Just as our opinion of an individual
is not based on what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such
a period of transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary,
this consciousness must rather be explained from the contradictions of
material life, from the existing conflict between the social forces
of production and the relations of production. No social order ever
disappears before all the productive forces, for which there is room
in it, have been developed; and new higher relations of production
never appear before the material conditions of their existence have
matured in the womb of the old society. Therefore, mankind always
takes up only such problems as it can solve; since, looking at the
matter more closely, we will always find that the problem itself
arises only when the material conditions necessary for its solution
already exist or are at least in the process of formation. In broad
outlines we can designate the Asiatic, the ancient, the feudal, and
the modern bourgeois methods of production as so many epochs in the
progress of the economic formation of society. The bourgeois relations
of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of
production―antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism, but
of one arising from conditions surrounding the life of individuals in
society; at the same time the productive forces developing in the womb
of bourgeois society create the material conditions for the solution
of that antagonism. This social formation constitutes, therefore, the
closing chapter of the prehistoric stage of human society.

Frederick Engels, with whom I was continually corresponding and
exchanging ideas since the appearance of his ingenious critical essay
on economic categories (in the “Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher”),
came by a different road to the same conclusions as myself (see his
“Condition of the Working Classes in England”). When he, too, settled
in Brussels in the spring of 1845, we decided to work out together the
contrast between our view and the idealism of the German philosophy, in
fact to settle our accounts with our former philosophic conscience. The
plan was carried out in the form of a criticism of the post-Hegelian
philosophy. The manuscript in two solid octavo volumes had long
reached the publisher in Westphalia, when we received information
that conditions had so changed as not to allow of its publication. We
abandoned the manuscript to the stinging criticism of the mice the
more readily since we had accomplished our main purpose―the clearing
up of the question to ourselves. Of the scattered writings on various
subjects in which we presented our views to the public at that time, I
recall only the “Manifesto of the Communist Party” written by Engels
and myself, and the “Discourse on Free Trade” written by myself. The
leading points of our theory were first presented scientifically,
though in a polemic form, in my “Misère de la Philosophie, etc.”
directed against Proudhon and published in 1847. An essay on “Wage
Labor,” written by me in German, and in which I put together my
lectures on the subject delivered before the German Workmen’s Club at
Brussels, was prevented from leaving the hands of the printer by the
February revolution and my expulsion from Belgium which followed it as
a consequence.

The publication of the “Neue Rheinische Zeitung” in 1848 and 1849, and
the events which took place later on, interrupted my economic studies
which I could not resume before 1850 in London. The enormous material
on the history of political economy which is accumulated in the British
Museum; the favorable view which London offers for the observation of
bourgeois society; finally, the new stage of development upon which the
latter seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, led me to the decision to resume my studies from the
very beginning and work up critically the new material. These studies
partly led to what might seem side questions, over which I nevertheless
had to stop for longer or shorter periods of time. Especially was the
time at my disposal cut down by the imperative necessity of working
for a living. My work as contributor on the leading Anglo-American
newspaper, the “New York Tribune,” at which I have now been engaged for
eight years, has caused very great interruption in my studies, since
I engage in newspaper work proper only occasionally. Yet articles on
important economic events in England and on the continent have formed
so large a part of my contributions that I have been obliged to make
myself familiar with practical details which lie outside the proper
sphere of political economy.

This account of the course of my studies in political economy is simply
to prove that my views, whatever one may think of them, and no matter
how little they agree with the interested prejudices of the ruling
classes, are the result of many years of conscientious research. At the
entrance to science, however, the same requirement must be put as at
the entrance to hell:

  Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto
  Ogni viltà convien che qui sia morta.


  Karl Marx.

  London, January, 1859.




CONTENTS.



                                                                  PAGE.

  Translator’s Preface                                                3

  Author’s Preface                                                    9


  BOOK I. CAPITAL IN GENERAL.

  Chapter I. Commodities                                             19

    A. Notes on the History of the Theory of Value                   56

  Chapter II. Money or Simple Circulation                            73

      1. The Measure of Value                                        74

    B. Theories of the Unit of Measure of Money                      91

      2. The Medium of Circulation                                  107

        a. The Metamorphosis of Commodities                         108

        b. The Circulation of Money                                 125

        c. Coin and Symbols of Value                                138

      3. Money                                                      162

        a. Hoarding                                                 166

        b. Means of Payment                                         185

        c. World Money                                              201

      4. The Precious Metals                                        208

    C. Theories of the Medium of Circulation and of
         Money                                                      215

  Appendix. Introduction to the Critique of Political
    Economy                                                         264

      1. Production in General                                      265

      2. The General Relation of Production to Distribution,
           Exchange, and Consumption                                274

      3. The Method of Political Economy                            292

      4. Production, Means of Production, and Conditions
           of Production                                            306

  Index                                                             313




CAPITAL IN GENERAL.




BOOK I.




CHAPTER I.

COMMODITIES.


At first sight the wealth of society under the capitalist system
presents itself as an immense accumulation of commodities, its unit
being a single commodity. But every commodity has a twofold aspect,
that of _use value_ and _exchange value_.[2]

A commodity is first of all, in the language of English economists,
“any thing necessary, useful or pleasant in life,” an object of human
wants, a means of existence in the broadest sense of the word. This
property of commodities to serve as use-values coincides with their
natural palpable existence. Wheat e. g. is a distinct use-value
differing from the use-values cotton, glass, paper, etc. Use-value has
a value only in use and is realized only in the process of consumption.
The same use-value may be utilized in various ways. But the extent of
its possible applications is circumscribed by its distinct properties.
Furthermore, it is thus limited not only qualitatively but also
quantitatively. According to their natural properties the various
use-values have different measures, such as a bushel of wheat, a quire
of paper, a yard of linen, etc.

Whatever the social form of wealth may be, use-values always have a
substance of their own, independent of that form. One can not tell by
the taste of wheat whether it has been raised by a Russian serf, a
French peasant, or an English capitalist. Although the object of social
wants and, therefore, mutually connected in society, use-values do
not bear any marks of the relations of social production. Suppose, we
have a commodity whose use-value is that of a diamond. We can not tell
by looking at the diamond that it is a commodity. When it serves as a
use-value, aesthetic or mechanical, on the breast of a harlot, or in
the hand of a glasscutter, it is a diamond and not a commodity. It is
the necessary prerequisite of a commodity to be a use-value, but it is
immaterial to the use-value whether it is a commodity or not. Use-value
in this indifference to the nature of its economic destination, i. e.
use-value as such lies outside the sphere of investigation of political
economy.[3] It falls within the sphere of the latter only in so far
as it forms its own economic destination. It forms the material basis
which directly underlies a definite economic relation called _exchange
value_.

Exchange-value appears at first sight as a _quantitative relation_,
as a proportion in which use-values are exchanged for one another. In
such a relation they constitute equal exchangeable quantities. Thus,
a volume of Propercius and eight ounces of snuff may represent the
same exchange value, in spite of the dissimilar use-values of tobacco
and elegy. As exchange-value, one kind of use-value is worth as much
as another kind, if only taken in right proportion. The exchange
value of a palace can be expressed in a certain number of boxes of
shoe-blacking. On the contrary, London manufacturers of shoe-blacking
have expressed the exchange value of their many boxes of blacking,
in palaces. Thus, entirely apart from their natural forms and
without regard to the specific kind of wants for which they serve as
use-values, commodities in certain quantities equal each other, take
each other’s place in exchange, pass as equivalents, and in spite of
their variegated appearance, represent the same entity.

Use-values are primarily means of existence. These means of existence,
however, are themselves products of social life, the result of expended
human vital power, _materialized labor_. As the embodiment of social
labor, all commodities are the crystallization of the same substance.
Let us now consider the nature of this substance, i. e., of labor,
which is expressed in exchange value.

Let one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat and
twenty yards of silk represent equal exchange values. As equivalents,
in which the qualitative difference between their use-values has been
eliminated, they represent equal volumes of the same kind of labor.
The labor which is equally embodied in all of them must be uniform,
homogeneous, simple labor. It matters as little in the case of labor
whether it be embodied in gold, iron, wheat, or silk, as it does in
the case of oxygen, whether it appears in the rust of iron, in the
atmosphere, in the juice of a grape, or in the blood of a human being.
But the digging of gold, the extraction of iron from a mine, the
raising of wheat and the weaving of silk are so many kinds of labor,
differing in quality. As a matter of fact, what in reality appears as a
difference in use-values, is in the process of production, a difference
in the work creating those use-values. Just as labor, which creates
exchange value, is indifferent to the material of use-values, so it
is to the special form of labor itself. Furthermore, the different
use-values are the products of the work of different individuals,
consequently the result of various kinds of labor differing
individually from one another. But as exchange values, they represent
the same homogeneous labor, i. e., labor from which the individuality
of the workers is eliminated. Labor creating exchange value is,
therefore, _abstract general labor_.

If one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat, and twenty
yards of silk are exchange values of equal magnitude or equivalents;
then one ounce of gold, half a ton of iron, three bushels of wheat
and five yards of silk are exchange values of different magnitudes,
and this quantitative difference is the only difference of which
they are capable as exchange values. As exchange values of different
magnitudes, they represent greater or smaller quantities of that
simple, homogeneous, abstract, general labor, which forms the substance
of exchange value. The question arises, how are these quantities to be
measured? Or, rather what constitutes the substance of labor, which
makes it capable of quantitative measurement, since the quantitative
differences of commodities in their capacity of exchange values are
but quantitative differences of labor embodied in them. Just as motion
is measured by time, so is labor measured by _labor-time_. Given
the quality of labor, the difference in its duration is the only
property by which it can be distinguished. As labor-time, labor has
the same standard of measurement as the natural time measures, viz.,
hours, days, weeks, etc. Labor-time is the vital substance of labor,
independent of its form, composition, individuality; it is its vital
substance quantitatively, having at the same time its own inherent
measure. Labor-time embodied in the use-values of commodities is the
substance which makes exchange values and, therefore, commodities of
them and at the same time serves to measure definite quantities of
their value. Corresponding quantities of different use-values, in which
the same quantity of labor-time is embodied, are equivalents; or, to
put it in another form, all use-values are equivalents when taken in
proportions containing the same quantity of expended, materialized
labor-time. As exchange values, all commodities are but definite
measures of _congealed labor-time_.

To understand how exchange value is determined by labor-time, the
following main points must be kept in mind: The reduction of labor to
simple labor, devoid of any quality, so to speak; the specific ways
and means by which exchange―value-creating, i. e., commodity producing
labor becomes _social labor_; finally, the difference between labor as
the producer of use-values, and labor as the creator of exchange values.

In order to measure commodities by the labor-time contained in them,
the different kinds of labor must be reduced to uniform, homogeneous,
simple labor, in short, to labor which is qualitatively the same, and,
therefore, differs only in quantity.

This reduction appears to be an abstraction; but it is an abstraction
which takes place daily in the social process of production. The
conversion of all commodities into labor-time is no greater abstraction
nor a less real process than the chemical reduction of all organic
bodies to air. Labor, thus measured by time, does not appear in reality
as the labor of different individuals. but on the contrary, the
various working individuals rather appear as mere organs of labor; or,
in so far as labor is represented by exchange values, it may be defined
as human labor in general. This abstraction of human labor in general
virtually exists in the average labor which the average individual
of a given society can perform―a certain productive expenditure of
human muscles, nerves, brain, etc. It is unskilled labor to which the
average individual can be put and which he has to perform in one way
or another. The character of this average labor varies in different
countries and at different stages of civilization, but appears fixed in
a particular society. Unskilled labor constitutes the bulk of all labor
performed in capitalist society, as may be seen from all statistics.

It is obvious that if A spends six hours in the production of iron
and six hours on linen, and B also produces iron during six hours and
linen during another six hours, it is but a different application
of _the same_ labor time that would be expended, if A produced iron
during twelve hours, while B worked twelve hours on linen. But how
about skilled labor which rises above the level of average labor by its
higher intensity, by its greater specific gravity? This kind of labor
resolves itself into unskilled labor composing it; it is simple labor
of a higher intensity, so that one day of skilled labor, e. g., may
equal three days of unskilled labor. This is not the place to consider
the laws regulating this reduction. It is clear, however, that such
reduction does take place, for, as exchange value, the product of the
most skilled labor is, when taken in a certain proportion, equivalent
to the product of unskilled average labor, or equal to a definite
quantity of that unskilled labor.

The determination of exchange-value by means of labor-time implies,
further, the fact that an equal quantity of labor is embodied in any
given commodity, e. g., a ton of iron, no matter whether it is the work
of A or B, that is to say, various individuals expend an equal amount
of labor-time for the production of the same use-value of a given
quality and quantity. It is thus assumed that the labor-time contained
in a commodity is the labor-time _necessary_ for its production, i. e.,
it is the labor-time which is required for the production of another
specimen of the same commodity under the same general conditions of
production.

The conditions of labor, which creates exchange value, as shown by the
analysis of the latter, are _social conditions_ of labor or conditions
of _social labor_. Social, not in the ordinary, but in a special
sense. It is a specific form of the social process. The homogeneous
simplicity of labor means first of all _equality_ of the labors of
various individuals, a reciprocal relation of equality of their labors
determined by the actual reduction of all kinds of labor to uniform
labor. The labor of every individual, as far as it is expressed in
exchange value possesses this social character of equality and finds
expression in exchange value only in so far as it is a relation of
equality with the labor of all other individuals.

Furthermore, the labor-time of a single individual is directly
expressed in exchange value as _universal labor-time_, and this
_universal character_ of individual labor is the manifestation of its
_social character_. The labor-time represented by exchange value is the
labor-time of an individual, but of an individual undistinguished from
other individuals in so far as they perform the same labor; therefore,
the time required by one individual for the production of a certain
commodity is the _necessary_ labor-time which any other individual
would have to spend on the production of the same commodity. It is the
labor-time of an individual, _his_ labor-time, but only as labor-time
common to all, regardless as to which particular individual’s
labor-time it is. As universal labor-time it is represented in a
universal product, in a _universal equivalent_, in a definite quantity
of materialized labor-time: the latter is indifferent as to the
particular form of use-value in which it appears directly as the
product of an individual, and may be turned at will into any other
form of use-value to represent the product of any other individual.
Only as such a _universal_ quantity, is it a _social_ quantity. In
order to result in exchange value, the labor of an individual must
be turned into a _universal equivalent_, i. e., the labor-time of an
individual must be expressed as universal labor-time, or universal
labor-time as that of an individual. It is the same as though different
individuals had put together their labor-time and contributed the
different quantities of labor-time at their common disposal in the form
of different use-values. The labor-time of the individual is thus,
in fact, the labor time which society requires for the production of
a certain use-value, i. e., for the satisfaction of a certain want.
But the question that interests us here is as to the specific form in
which labor acquires a social character. Let us suppose that a certain
quantity of labor-time of a spinner is realized in 100 lbs. of yarn.
Suppose 100 yards of linen, the product of the weaver, represent the
same quantity of labor-time. Inasmuch as these two products represent
equal quantities of universal labor-time and, hence, are equivalents of
_every_ use-value which contains the same amount of labor-time, they
are also equivalent to each other. Only because the labor-time of the
spinner and that of the weaver take the form of universal labor-time
and their products appear as universal equivalents, is the labor of
the weaver realized for the spinner, and that of the spinner, for the
weaver, the labor of one takes the place of the labor of the other, i.
e., the social character of their labors is realized for both. Quite
different it was under the patriarchal system of production, when
spinner and weaver lived under the same roof, when the female members
of the family did the spinning, and the male members did the weaving to
supply the wants of their own family; then yarn and linen were _social_
products, spinning and weaving were _social_ labor within the limits of
the family. But their social character did not manifest itself in the
fact that yarn, as a universal equivalent, could be exchanged for linen
as a universal equivalent, or that one was exchanged for another, as
identical and equivalent expressions of the same universal labor-time.
It was rather the family organization with its natural division of
labor that impressed its peculiar social stamp on the product of
labor. Or, let us take the services and payments in kind of the Middle
Ages. It was the specific kind of labor performed by each individual in
its natural form, the particular and not the universal aspect of labor,
that constituted then the social tie. Or, let us finally take labor
carried on in common in its primitive natural form, as we find it at
the dawn of history of all civilized races.[4] It is clear that in this
case labor does not acquire its social character from the fact that the
labor of the individual takes on the abstract form of universal labor
or that his product assumes the form of a universal equivalent. The
very nature of production under a communal system makes it impossible
for the labor of the individual to be private labor and his product
to be a private product; on the contrary, it makes individual labor
appear as the direct function of a member of a social organism. On the
contrary, labor, which is expressed in exchange value, at once appears
as the labor of a separate individual. It becomes social labor only
by taking on the form of its direct opposite, the form of abstract
universal labor.

Labor, which creates exchange value, is, finally, characterized by the
fact that even the social relations of men appear in the reversed form
of a social relation of things. Only in so far as two use-values are
in a mutual relation of exchange values does the labor of different
persons possess the common property of being identical universal labor.
Hence, if it be correct to say that exchange value is a relation
between persons,[5] it must be added that it is a relation disguised
under a material cover. Just as a pound of iron and a pound of gold
represent the _same_ weight in spite of their different physical and
chemical properties, so do two use-values, as commodities containing
the same quantity of labor-time, represent the _same exchange value_.
Exchange value thus appears as the natural social destination of
use-values, a property which they possess by virtue of being things and
in consequence of which they are exchanged for one another in definite
proportions, or form equivalents, just as chemical elements combine in
certain proportions, forming chemical equivalents. It is only through
the habit of everyday life that we come to think it perfectly plain and
commonplace, that a social relation of production should take on the
form of a thing, so that the relation of persons in their work appears
in the form of a mutual relation between things, and between things
and persons.

In commodities this mystification is as yet very simple. It is more
or less plain to everybody that a relation of commodities as exchange
values is nothing but a mutual relation between persons in their
productive activity. This semblance of simplicity disappears in higher
productive relations. All the illusions in regard to the monetary
system are due to the fact that money is not regarded as something
representing a social relation of production, but as a product of
nature endowed with certain properties. The modern economists who sneer
at the illusions of the monetary system, betray the same illusion
as soon as they have to deal with higher economic forms, as, e. g.,
capital.[6] It breaks forth in their confession of naive surprise, when
what they have just thought to have defined with great difficulty as a
thing suddenly appears as a social relation and then reappears to tease
them again as a thing, before they have barely managed to define it as
a social relation.

Since the exchange value of commodities is, in fact, nothing but a
mutual relation of the labors of individuals―labors which are similar
and universal―nothing but a material expression of a specific social
form of labor, it is a tautology to say that labor is the _only_
source of exchange value and consequently of wealth, in so far as the
latter consists of exchange values. Similarly, it is a tautology to
say that matter in its natural state has no exchange value, because
it does not contain any labor, and that exchange value as such does
not contain matter. But when William Petty calls “labor the father and
earth the mother of wealth,” or when Bishop Berkeley asks “whether
the four elements and man’s labour therein, be not the true source of
wealth,”[7] or when the American, Thomas Cooper puts it popularly:
“Take away from a piece of bread the labour bestowed by the baker on
the flour, by the miller on the grain brought to him, by the farmer
in ploughing, sowing, tending, gathering, threshing, cleaning and
transporting the seed, and what will remain? A few grains of grass,
growing wild in the woods, and unfit for any human purpose”[8]―then all
these views do not refer to abstract labor as the source of exchange
value, but to concrete labor as the source of material wealth; in
short, to labor in so far as it produces use-values. In assuming
that a commodity has use-value we assume the special usefulness
and distinct fitness of the labor absorbed by it, but that is all
there is to the view of labor as useful labor from the standpoint of
commodity. Considering bread as a use-value, we are interested in its
properties as an article of food and not at all in the different kinds
of labor of the farmer, miller, baker, etc. If by some invention
nineteen-twentieths of this labor could be saved, the loaf of bread
would still render the same service as before. If it fell ready-made
from the sky it would not lose a single atom of its use-value. While
labor which creates exchange value is realized in the equality of
commodities as universal equivalents, labor as a productive activity
with a useful purpose is realized in the endless variety of use-values
created by it. While labor which creates exchange values is _abstract_,
_universal_ and _homogeneous_, labor which produces use-values is
concrete and special and is made up of an endless variety of kinds of
labor according to the way in which and the material to which it is
applied.

It is wrong to speak of labor in so far as it is applied to the
production of use-values as of _the only_ source of wealth, namely,
the material wealth produced by it. Being an activity intended to
adapt materials to this or that purpose, it requires matter as a
prerequisite. In different use-values the proportion between labor
and raw material varies greatly, but use-value always has a natural
substratum. Labor, as an activity, directed to the adaptation of raw
material in one form or another, is a natural condition of human
existence, a condition of exchange of matter between man and nature,
independent of all social forms. On the contrary, labor producing
exchange value is a specifically social form of labor. Tailoring, e.
g., in its material manifestation as a distinct productive activity,
produces a coat, but not the exchange value of the coat. The latter
is produced not by the labor of the tailor as such, but by abstract
universal labor, and that belongs to a certain organization of society
which has not been brought about by the tailor. Thus, the women under
the ancient system of house industry made coats without producing the
exchange value of the coats. Labor as a source of material wealth was
known to Moses, the legislator, as well as to Adam Smith, the customs
official.[9]

Let us consider now some propositions which follow from the
determination of exchange value by labor-time.

As a use-value, every commodity owes its usefulness to itself. Wheat,
e. g., serves as an article of food. A machine saves labor to a certain
extent. This function of a commodity by virtue of which it serves only
as use-value, as an article of consumption, may be called its service,
the service which it renders as use-value. But as an exchange value,
a commodity is always regarded as a result; the question in this case
is not as to the service which it renders, but as to the service[10]
which it has been rendered in its production. Thus, the exchange value
of a machine is determined not by the quantity of labor-time which it
saves, but by the quantity of labor-time which has been expended on
its own production and which is, therefore, required to produce a new
machine of the same kind.

If, therefore, the quantity of labor-time required for the production
of commodities remained constant, their exchange value would remain
the same. But the ease and the difficulty of production are constantly
changing. If the productivity of labor increases, the same use-value
will be produced in less time. If the productivity of labor declines,
more time will be required for the production of the same use-value.
Thus, the labor-time contained in a commodity or its exchange-value is
a variable quantity, increasing or diminishing in an inverse ratio to
the rise and fall of the productivity of labor. The productive power of
labor which is applied in the manufacturing industry on a predetermined
scale depends in the agricultural and extractive industries also on
natural conditions which are beyond human control. _The same labor_
will yield a greater or less output of various metals, according to
their more or less close occurrence in the earth’s crust. _The same
labor_ may be embodied in two bushels of wheat in a favorable season,
and only in one in an unfavorable season. In this case, scarcity or
abundance, as natural conditions, seem to determine the exchange value
of commodities, because they determine the productivity of certain
kinds of labor which depend upon natural conditions.

Unequal volumes of different use-value contain the same quantity of
labor-time or the same exchange value. The smaller the volume of a
use-value containing a certain quantity of labor-time as compared with
other use-values, the greater its _specific exchange-value_. If we find
that certain use-values, such as, e. g., gold, silver, copper and iron,
or wheat, rye, barley and oats, form a series of specific exchange
values which, though not retaining exactly the same numerical ratio,
still retain through widely remote epochs of civilization the same
rough proportion of relatively larger and smaller quantities, we may
draw the conclusion that the progressive development of the productive
powers of society has equally, or approximately so, affected the
labor-time necessary for the production of the various commodities.

The exchange value of a commodity is not revealed in its own use-value.
But, as the embodiment universal social labor-time, the use-value
of one commodity bears a certain ratio to the use-values of other
commodities. Thus, the exchange value of one commodity is manifested
in the use-values of other commodities. An equivalent is, in fact, the
exchange value of one commodity expressed in the use-value of another
commodity. If I say, e. g., that one yard of linen is worth two pounds
of coffee, then the exchange value of linen is expressed in terms of
the use-value of coffee, viz., in a certain quantity of that use-value.
This ratio being given, I can express the value of any quantity of
linen in coffee. It is clear that the exchange value of one commodity,
say linen, is not confined to the ratio of any one commodity, e. g.
coffee, as its equivalent. The quantity of universal labor-time which
is represented in one yard of linen is at the same time embodied in
an endless variety of volumes of use-values of all other commodities.
The use-value of any other commodity forms the equivalent of one yard
of linen, in the proportion in which it represents the same quantity of
labor-time as that yard of linen. The exchange value of _this single
commodity_ is, therefore, fully expressed in the endless number of
equations in which the use-values of all other commodities form its
equivalents. Not until the exchange value of a commodity is expressed
in the sum total of these equations or of the different proportions in
which one commodity is exchanged for every other commodity, does it
find an exhaustive expression as a _universal equivalent_; e. g., the
series of equations:

  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea,
  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee,
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread,
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico,

may be represented as follows:

1 yard of linen = 1/8 lb. of tea + 1/2 lb. of coffee + 2 lbs. of bread
+ 1-1/2 yards of calico.

Therefore, if we had before us the sum total of the equations, in
which the value of a yard of linen is exhaustively expressed, we could
represent its exchange value in the form of a series. As a matter of
fact, the series is an endless one, since the circle of commodities,
constantly expanding, can never be closed up. But while the exchange
value of one commodity is thus measured by the use-values of all other
commodities, the exchange values of all the other commodities are, in
their turn, measured by the use-value of this one commodity.[11]

If the exchange value of one yard of linen is expressed in 1/2 lb. of
tea, or 2 lbs. of coffee, or 6 yards of calico, or 8 lbs. of bread,
etc., it follows that coffee, tea, calico, bread, etc., are equal to
each other if taken in the same proportion in which they are equal to
the third article, linen; consequently, linen serves as the common
measure of their exchange values. Every commodity, as the embodiment
of universal labor-time, i. e., as a certain quantity of universal
labor-time, expresses in turn its exchange value in definite quantities
of the use-values of all other commodities, and the exchange values
of all the other commodities are, on the other hand, measured by the
use-value of this one exclusive commodity. But as an exchange value,
every commodity is at the same time the one exclusive commodity
that serves as a common measure of the exchange values of all other
commodities; and, on the other hand, it is but one of the many
commodities in the entire series of which every commodity expresses
directly its exchange value.

The value of a commodity is not affected by the number of commodities
of other kinds. But the length of the series of equations in which
its exchange value is realized does depend upon the greater or less
variety of other commodities. The series of equations in which the
value of coffee, e. g., is represented, indicates the extent to which
it is exchangeable, the limits within which it performs the function of
an exchange value. The exchange value of a commodity as an embodiment
of universal social labor-time is expressed in its equivalence to an
endless variety of use-values.

We have seen that the exchange value of a commodity varies with the
quantity of labor-time directly contained in it. Its realized exchange
value, i. e., its exchange value expressed in the use-values of other
commodities, must also depend on the proportion in which the labor-time
spent on the production of all other commodities is changing. If, e.
g., the labor-time required for the production of a bushel of wheat
remained constant, while that required for the production of all other
commodities doubled, the exchange value of a bushel of wheat expressed
in its equivalents would become half as large as before. The result
would be practically the same as if the amount of time necessary for
the production of one bushel of wheat had been reduced by one-half,
and that required for all other commodities had remained unchanged.
The value of commodities is determined by the proportion in which they
can be produced in the same labor-time. In order to see what possible
changes this proportion may undergo, let us take two commodities, A and
B.

_First case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity B remain unchanged. In that case the exchange value of A,
expressed in terms of B, rises and falls with the rise and fall of the
labor-time required for the production of A.

_Second case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity A remain constant. Then the exchange value of A, expressed in
terms of B, falls and rises in an inverse ratio with the rise and fall
of the labor-time required for the production of B.

_Third case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodities A and B rise and fall in equal proportion. Then the
expression of equivalence of A and B remains unchanged. If through some
cause the productivity of all kinds of labor were to decline uniformly,
so that the production of all commodities would require an equally
increased quantity of labor-time, then the value of all commodities
would rise, though the expression of their exchange values would remain
unchanged, and the actual wealth of society would decrease, because
it would have to expend more labor-time on the production of the same
stock of use-values.

_Fourth case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of A and
B rise and fall, but not uniformly; that is to say, the labor-time
required for the production of A may rise, while that required for B
may fall, or vice versa. All of which can be reduced to the simple
case where the labor-time required for the production of one commodity
remains unchanged, while that required for the other rises or falls.

The exchange value of any commodity is expressed in the use-value of
any other commodity, be it in integral units or in fractions thereof.
As exchange value, every commodity is capable of subdivision, like
the labor-time embodied in it. The equivalence of commodities is
independent of their physical divisibility as use-values, just as the
sum of the exchange values of commodities is indifferent to the change
of form which use-values have to undergo when converted into a _single_
new commodity.

So far we have considered commodities from a twofold point of view,
as use-values and exchange values alternately. But a commodity as such
is a direct combination of use-value and exchange value; and it is a
commodity only in relation to other commodities. The _actual_ relation
between commodities constitutes the _process of their exchange_. It is
a social process participated in by individuals independent of each
other but the part they take in it is that of owners of commodities
only. Their mutual relations are those of their commodities, and thus
they really appear as conscious factors of the process of exchange.

A commodity _is_ a use-value, wheat, linen, a diamond, a machine,
etc., but as a commodity it is, at the same time, _not_ a use-value.
If it were a use-value for its owner, i. e., a direct means for the
satisfaction of his own wants, then it would not be a commodity. To him
it is rather _a non-use-value_; it is merely the material depository of
exchange-value, or simply a _means of exchange_; as an active bearer of
exchange value, use-value becomes a means of exchange. To the owner it
is a use-value only in so far as it constitutes exchange value.[12]

It has yet _to become_ a use-value, viz., to others. Not being a
use-value to its owner, it is a use-value to the owners of other
commodities. If it is not, then the labor expended on it was useless
labor, and the result of that labor is not a commodity. On the other
hand, the commodity must become a use-value _to the owner himself_,
because his means of existence lie outside of it in the use-values of
commodities not belonging to him. In order to become a use-value, the
commodity must meet the particular want of which it is the means of
satisfaction. Use-values of commodities are thus _realized_ use-values
through a universal change of hands by passing from the hands in which
they were held as means of exchange into those where they become use
values. Only through this universal transfer of commodities does the
labor contained in them become useful labor. In this process of their
mutual interchange as use-values, commodities do not acquire any new
economic forms. On the contrary, even the form which marked them as
commodities disappears. Bread, e. g., by changing hands from the baker
to the consumer does not change its identity as bread. On the contrary,
it is only the consumer that begins to regard it as a use-value, as a
certain article of food, while in the hands of the baker it was only
the bearer of an economic relation, a palpable yet transcendental
object. Thus, the only change of form that commodities undergo while
becoming use-values, consists in the fact that they cease to be, as
a matter of form, non-use-values to their owners, and use-values to
those who do not own them. To become use-values commodities must be
universally alienated; they must enter the sphere of exchange; but
they are subject to exchange in their capacity of exchange values.
Hence, in order to be realized as use-values, they must be realized as
exchange values.

While the single commodity appeared from the standpoint of use-value as
something independent, as exchange value it was regarded first of all
in its relation to all other commodities. This relation was, however,
merely theoretical, imaginary. It becomes real only in the process of
exchange. On the other hand, a commodity _is_ an exchange value in so
far as a certain quantity of labor-time has been expended on it, and
it consequently represents _materialized labor-time_. But of itself it
is only materialized individual labor-time of a particular kind, and
not _universal_ labor-time. Therefore, it _is not_ directly an exchange
value, but must first _become_ such. First of all, it is an embodiment
of universal labor-time only in so far as it represents labor-time
applied to a definite useful purpose, i. e., when it represents a
use-value. This was the material condition under which alone labor-time
contained in commodities was regarded as universal social labor.
Thus, while a commodity can become a use-value only after it has been
realized as an exchange value, it can, on the other hand, be realized
as an exchange value only if it proves to be a use-value in the process
of alienation.

A commodity can be alienated as a use-value only to one whom it
serves as a use-value, i. e., as a means of satisfying a certain
want. On the other hand, it is exchanged for another commodity, or,
if we put ourselves on the side of the owner of the other commodity,
it, too, can be alienated, i. e., be realized, only if brought in
contact with that particular want of which it is the object. In the
universal exchange of commodities as _use-values_ the basis for
their mutual relations is in their material difference as distinct
objects which satisfy different wants by their specific properties.
But as mere use-values, they are indifferent to each other, and
are incommensurable. As use-values they can be exchanged only with
reference to certain wants. They are exchangeable only as equivalents,
and they are equivalents only as equal quantities of materialized
labor-time, so that all regard to their natural properties as
use-values and therefore to the relation of the commodities to
particular wants is eliminated. On the contrary, a commodity is
realized as an exchange value by replacing as an equivalent any
definite quantity of any other commodity, regardless of whether it
is a use-value for the owner of the other commodity or not. But to
the owner of the other commodity it is a commodity only in so far
as it is a use-value to him, and it becomes an exchange value to
its owner only in so far as it is a commodity to that other person.
Thus, the same relation appears as a proportion between commodities
as magnitudes of the same denomination, but differing qualitatively;
or, as an expression of their equivalence as embodiments of universal
labor-time, and, at the same time, as a relation of qualitatively
different objects, of use-values intended for the satisfaction of
particular wants, in short, a relation in which they are distinguished
as actual use-values. But this equivalence and non-equivalence mutually
exclude each other. Thus we have before us not only a vicious circle
of problems in which the solution of one implies that of the other, but
a combination of contradicting claims, since the fulfillment of one is
directly connected with that of its opposite.

The process of exchange of commodities must result both in the
unfolding and in the solution of these contradictions, neither of
which, however, can appear in that process in this simple way. We
have only observed how commodities are mutually related to each other
as use-values, i. e., how they appear as use-values _within_ the
process of exchange. The exchange-value, on the contrary, as we have
considered it so far, appeared as an abstraction formed in our own
minds, or―if we may so put it―in the mind of the individual owner
of commodities, which lie stored in his warehouse as use-values,
and weigh upon his conscience as exchange values. In the process of
exchange, however, commodities must be not only use-values, but also
exchange values to one another, and that should appear as their own
mutual relation. The difficulty which we first encountered was that a
commodity must be first alienated and delivered to its purchasers as
a use-value, in order to appear as an exchange value, as materialized
labor, while on the other hand its alienation as use-value implies
its being an exchange value. But let us assume that this difficulty
has been overcome. Suppose the commodity has divested itself of its
use-value, and has thereby fulfilled the material condition of being
socially useful labor, instead of a particular labor of an individual.
In that case, the commodity must become an exchange value, a universal
equivalent, an embodiment of universal labor-time for all other
commodities in the process of exchange, and thus, leaving behind its
limited role of a particular use-value, acquire the ability to be
directly represented in all use-values as its equivalents. But every
commodity is _just such_ a commodity, appearing as a direct incarnation
of universal labor-time by divesting itself of its particular
use-value. On the other hand, however, commodities confront each other
in the process of exchange as particular commodities, as the labor
of private individuals embodied in particular use-values. Universal
labor-time is itself an abstraction, which, as such, does not exist for
commodities.

Let us examine the series of equations in which the exchange value of a
commodity finds its concrete expression, e. g.:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread, etc.

These equations simply signify that equal quantities of universal
social labor-time are embodied in one yard of linen, two pounds
of coffee, half a pound of tea, etc. But as a matter of fact the
individual labors which are represented in these particular use-values,
become universal, and, in that form, also social labor, only when they
are actually exchanged for one another in proportion to the labor-time
contained in them. Social labor-time exists in these commodities in
a latent state, so to say, and is first revealed in the process of
exchange. We do not proceed from the labor of individuals as social
labor, but, on the contrary, from special labor of private individuals
which appears as universal social labor only by divesting itself of
its original character in the process of exchange. Universal social
labor is, therefore, no ready-made assumption, but a growing result.
And thus we are confronted with a new difficulty, that on the one
hand commodities must enter the process of exchange as embodiments of
universal labor-time, while, on the other hand, this embodiment of the
labor-time of individuals as social labor-time is itself a result of
the process of exchange.

Every commodity becomes an exchange value by divesting itself of its
use-value, or of its original nature. The commodity must therefore
assume a double capacity in the process of exchange. But that second
capacity of exchange value can appear only in the shape of another
commodity, because only commodities confront each other in the process
of exchange. How is a particular commodity to represent directly
_materialized universal_ labor-time, or―to put it differently―how is
individual labor-time, which is embodied in a particular commodity to
be made directly universal in character? The concrete expression of the
exchange value of a commodity, i. e., of every commodity as a universal
equivalent, is represented in an endless series of equations, such as:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread.
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico.
  1 yard of linen = etc.

The above form is theoretical in so far as commodities are only
_thought of_ as definite quantities of materialized universal
labor-time. But the capacity of a particular commodity to serve as a
universal equivalent from a mere abstraction becomes a _social_ result
of the process of exchange by a simple inversion of the above series of
equations, viz.:

  2 lbs. of coffee  = 1 yard of linen.
  1/2 lb. of tea    = 1 yard of linen.
  8 lbs. of bread   = 1 yard of linen.
  6 yards of calico = 1 yard of linen.

While coffee, tea, bread, calico, in short, all commodities express
in linen the labor-time contained in them, the exchange value of
linen, on the other hand, unfolds itself in all other commodities as
its equivalents, and the labor-time embodied in it becomes direct
universal labor-time, which is equally expressed in different volumes
of all other commodities. Linen thus becomes the _universal equivalent_
through the _universal action_ of all other commodities upon it.
As exchange value, every commodity served as a measure of value of
all other commodities. Now, on the contrary, since all commodities
measure their exchange values by means of a particular commodity,
this excluded commodity becomes the special expression of exchange
value, as a universal equivalent. At the same time, the endless
series of equations in which the exchange value of every commodity
was expressed, is reduced to one single equation consisting of two
members. The equation 2 lbs. of coffee = 1 yard of linen now fully
expresses the exchange value of coffee, for in this expression a yard
of linen appears as the direct equivalent of a definite quantity
of every other commodity. Thus, within the sphere of exchange all
commodities are or appear to each other as exchange values in the
form of linen. The proposition that commodities, as exchange values,
are to each other as different quantities of materialized universal
labor-time, may now be worded to the effect that commodities, as
exchange values, represent nothing but different quantities of _the
same_ article, linen. Universal labor-time thus assumes the aspect of
a distinct thing, as a commodity existing along with and outside of
all other commodities. At the same time the equation 2 lbs. of coffee
= 1 yard of linen, in which one commodity appears as the exchange
value of another, is yet to be realized. Only by being alienated as
use-value―which depends upon whether it proves to be in the process
of exchange the object of a certain want―does the commodity actually
transform its existence as coffee into the existence as linen and
thus takes on the form of a universal equivalent and becomes, indeed,
an exchange value for all other commodities. Conversely, since all
commodities are turned into linen by being alienated as use-values,
linen becomes the converted form of all other commodities, and only as
a result of this transformation of all other commodities into it, it
becomes the direct _embodiment of universal labor-time_, i. e., the
product of universal exchange and of the elimination of individual
labor. If commodities thus assume a twofold character in order to
appear as exchange values to each other, the commodity which has been
singled out as the universal equivalent becomes, on the other hand, a
use-value in two ways. Besides its special use-value as a particular
commodity, it assumes a universal use-value. This latter kind of
use-value constitutes its special feature, emanating as it does,
from the specific part which the commodity plays as a result of the
universal relation which all other commodities bear toward it in the
process of exchange. The use-value of every commodity as an object of
a particular want, has a different value in different hands, e. g., it
has a different value in the hands of the one who disposes of it, than
in those of the one who acquires it. But the commodity singled out as
the universal equivalent, is now an object of a universal want arising
from the very process of exchange, and it has the same use-value to
everybody, viz., that of serving as the depository of exchange value,
of being a universal means of exchange. Thus we find in one commodity
the solution of the contradiction which is inherent in commodity as
such, namely, of being at one and the same time a particular use-value
and a universal equivalent, and, therefore, a use-value for everybody
or universal use-value. Thus, while all other commodities express their
exchange value in the form of an ideal equation with the excluded
commodity―an equation yet to be realized―the use-value of the special
commodity, although real, appears in the process itself as a mere
form which is yet to be realized through transformation into actual
use-values. Originally the commodity appeared simply as commodity, as
universal labor-time embodied in a particular use-value. In the process
of exchange, all commodities are related to the one excluded commodity
as to a simple commodity, one which appears as the embodiment of
universal labor-time in a particular use-value. Thus, _particular_
commodities become related to one particular commodity as a universal
commodity.[13] In that manner the mutual relations of possessors of
commodities based on the fact that they regard their labor as universal
social labor, takes on the aspect of their relations to commodities as
exchange values; and the mutual relation of commodities as exchange
values appears in the process of exchange as the relation of all of
them to one particular commodity as to a specially adopted means of
expression of their exchange value; again, from the point of view of
that particular commodity the above relation appears as its specific
relation to all other commodities, and, therefore, as its own definite,
spontaneous, social character. The particular commodity which thus
appears as the specially adopted expression of the exchange value
of all other commodities, or the exchange value of commodities as a
particular exclusive commodity, is _money_. Money is a crystallization
of the exchange value of commodities which they themselves form in
the process of exchange. Thus, while commodities become _use-values_
to each other in the process of exchange by casting off all definite
forms and entering into mutual relations in their direct material
shape, they must assume a new form, viz., proceed to the formation of
money in order to appear as _exchange values_ to each other. Money
is not a symbol, no more than the commodity aspect of a use-value
is a symbol. That a social relation of production takes the form of
an object existing outside of individuals, and that the definite
relations into which individuals enter in the process of production
carried on in society, assume the form of specific properties of a
thing, is a perversion and by no means imaginary, but prosaically real,
mystification marking all social forms of labor which creates exchange
value. In money this mystification appears only more strikingly than in
commodities.

The necessary physical properties of the particular commodity in which
the money form of all other commodities is to be crystallized―as far
as they are directly determined by the nature of exchange value―are:
divisibility to any desired extent, homogeneity of its parts, and
uniformity of all the specimens of the commodity. As an embodiment
of universal labor-time it must be homogeneous in its structure
and capable of representing only quantitative differences. Another
necessary property is durability of its use-value, as it must last
through the process of exchange. The precious metals excel in these
qualities. Money not being a result of a scheme or agreement, but
having been produced instinctively in the process of exchange, a great
variety of more or less unsuited commodities had successively performed
its functions. At a certain stage of development of the process
of exchange, the necessity arises for a polar distribution of the
functions of exchange value and use-value among commodities, so that
one commodity e. g. should act as a medium of exchange, while another
is being alienated as a use-value. This necessity brings it about that
one or even several commodities possessing the most generally accepted
use-value, begin, incidentally at first, to play the part of money.
Even if not direct means of satisfying existing wants, their being the
most considerable material constituent part of wealth, insures to them
a more general character than to the other use-values.

Direct barter, the original natural form of exchange, represents rather
the beginning of the transformation of use-values into commodities,
than that of commodities into money. Exchange value has as yet no
form of its own, but is still directly bound up with use-value. This
is manifested in two ways. Production, in its entire organization,
aims at the creation of use-values and not of exchange values, and
it is only when their supply exceeds the measure of consumption that
use-values cease to be use-values, and become means of exchange,
i. e., commodities. At the same time, they become commodities only
within the limits of being direct use-values distributed at opposite
poles, so that the commodities to be exchanged by their possessors
must be use-values to both,―each commodity to its non-possessor. As a
matter of fact, the exchange of commodities originates not within the
primitive communities,[14] but where they end, on their borders at the
few points, where they come in contact with other communities. That is
where barter begins, and from here it strikes back into the interior
of the community, decomposing it. The various use-values which first
become commodities in the barter between different communities, such
as slaves, cattle, metals, constitute therefore in most cases the
first money within those communities themselves. We have seen how
the exchange value of a commodity is manifested the more perfectly
as exchange value, the longer the series of its equivalents or the
_greater_ the sphere of exchange of that commodity. With the gradual
expansion of barter, the increase in the number of exchanges, and
the growing diversification of the commodities drawn into exchange,
commodities develop into exchange values, which leads to the formation
of money and has a destructive effect on direct barter. The economists
are in the habit of ascribing the origin of money to the difficulties
which are encountered in the way of extensive barter, but they forget
that these difficulties arise from the development of exchange value
and from the fact that social labor becomes universal labor. E. g.,
commodities as use-values can not be subdivided at will, a property
which they should possess as exchange values. Or, a commodity belonging
to A may be a use-value to B, while the commodity belonging to B may
not have any use-value to A. Or the owners of the commodities may
need each other’s indivisible goods in unequal proportions. In other
words, under the pretence of analyzing simple barter, economists
bring out certain aspects of the contradiction which is inherent in
commodities as entities simultaneously embodying both use-value and
exchange value. On the other hand, they consistently cling to the
idea that barter is the natural form of exchange, which suffers only
from certain technical difficulties, for which money is a cunningly
devised expedient. Arguing from this perfectly superficial view, an
ingenious English economist has rightly maintained that money is
merely a material instrument like a ship or a steam-engine, but not
an expression of a social relation in the field of production and
consequently not an economic category; and that it is, therefore, wrong
to treat the subject in political economy, which really has nothing in
common with technology.[15]

The world of commodities implies the existence of a highly developed
division of labor; this division is manifested directly in the great
variety of use-values, which confront each other as particular
commodities and which embody as many different kinds of labor. The
division of labor embracing all the particular kinds of productive
occupations, is the complete expression of social labor in its material
aspect viewed as labor creating use-values. But from the standpoint of
commodities and within the process of exchange, it exists only in its
results, in the variety of the commodities themselves.

The exchange of commodities constitutes the social metabolic process,
i. e. the process in which the exchange of the special products of
private individuals is the result of certain social relations of
production into which the individuals enter in this interchange of
matter. As they develop, the mutual relations of commodities crystalize
into various aspects of the universal equivalent and thus the process
of exchange becomes at the same time the process of the formation of
money. The whole of this process which takes the form of a succession
of processes, constitutes circulation.


NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF THE THEORY OF COMMODITIES.

The analysis of commodities according to their twofold aspect of
use-value and exchange value by which the former is reduced to work
or deliberate productive activity; and the latter, to labor time or
homogeneous social labor, is the result of a century and a half of
critical study by the classical school of political economy which dates
from William Petty in England and Boisguillebert in France[16] and
closes with Ricardo in the former country and Sismondi in the latter.

Petty reduces use-value to labor, without deceiving himself as to the
natural limitation of its creative power. As regards concrete labor,
he sizes it up in the magnitude of its social aspect, as _the division
of labor_.[17] This view of the source of material wealth does not
remain more or less fruitless as in the case of his contemporary,
Hobbes, but leads up to his _Political Arithmetic_, the first form in
which Political Economy is differentiated as an independent science.

He defines exchange value, however, just as it _appears_ in the process
of exchange of commodities, viz. as money; and money he defines as
an existing commodity, gold and silver. Laboring under the ideas of
the monetary system, he declares the special branch of labor which
is devoted to the production of gold and silver as the labor which
determines exchange value. What he really means is that the labor of
members of society must produce not direct use-values, but commodities
or use-values which by means of exchange are capable of assuming the
form of gold and silver, i. e. of money, i. e. of exchange value, i.
e. of embodiments of universal labor. His example, however, shows
strikingly that the recognition of labor as the source of material
wealth by no means excludes the misconception of the particular social
form in which labor constitutes the source of exchange value.

In his turn, Boisguillebert, if not consciously, at any rate actually
reduces the exchange value of a commodity to labor-time, since he
determines “true value” (la juste valeur) by the right proportion in
which the labor-time of individuals is distributed among the several
branches of industry, and defines free competition as the social
process which determines these correct proportions. At the same time,
however, and in contrast with Petty he wages a fanatical war against
money which, by its interference, disturbs the natural equilibrium or
harmony of exchange of commodities and, like a wanton Moloch, demands
all natural wealth as sacrifice. It is true that this assault on money
was called forth by certain historic conditions. Since Boisguillebert
attacked[18] the blind destructive lust after gold which possessed
the court of Louis XIV, his tax collectors, and his nobility; on the
other hand, Petty extolled in the greed of gold the mighty impulse
which spurred on the nation in her industrial development and in her
conquest of the world-market; still, there asserts itself here a
deeper antagonism of principles which constantly recurs between true
English and true French[19] Political Economy. Boisguillebert sees,
in fact, only the material substance of wealth, its use-value, the
enjoyment[20] of it, and considers the capitalistic form of labor, i.
e. the production of use-values as commodities and the exchange of
those commodities, as the natural social form in which individual labor
attains its end. When he is, therefore, confronted with the specific
character of capitalistic wealth as in the case of money, he sees in it
the usurping interference of extraneous elements and gets into a rage
about the capitalist system of labor in one form while utopian-like
he praises it in another.[21] Boisguillebert furnishes us with proof
that one may treat labor-time as the measure of value of commodities,
and at the same time confound labor embodied in the exchange value of
commodities and measured by time, with the direct natural activity of
individuals.

The first sensible analysis of exchange value as labor-time, made so
clear as to seem almost commonplace, is to be found in the work of
a man of the New World where the bourgeois relations of production
imported together with their representatives sprouted rapidly in a
soil which made up its lack of historical traditions with a surplus of
humus. That man was Benjamin Franklin, who formulated the fundamental
law of modern political economy[22] in his first work which he wrote
when a mere youth and published in 1721.

He declares it necessary to look for another measure of value than
precious metals. That measure is labor. “By labor may the value of
silver be measured as well as other things. As, suppose one man
employed to raise corn, while another is digging and refining silver;
at the year’s end, or at any other period of time, the complete produce
of corn, and that of silver, are the natural price of each other; and
if one be twenty bushels, and the other twenty ounces, then an ounce
of that silver is worth the labor of raising a bushel of that corn.
Now if by the discovery of some nearer, more easy or plentiful mines,
a man may get forty ounces of silver as easily as formerly he did
twenty, and the same labor is still required to raise twenty bushels
of corn, then two ounces of silver will be worth no more than the same
labor of raising one bushel of corn, and that bushel of corn will be
as cheap at two ounces, as it was before at one, _ceteris paribus_.
Thus the riches of a country are to be valued by the quantity of labor
its inhabitants are able to purchase.”[23] Thus Franklin regards
labor-time from the one-sided economic point of view, as the measure
of value. The transformation of actual products into exchange values
is self-evident with him and the only question is as to finding a
quantitative measure of value. “Trade,” says he, “in general being
nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all
things is, as I have said before, most justly measured by labour.”[24]
Substitute the word “work” for “labor” in the above statement, and
the confusion of labor in one form and labor in another form becomes
at once apparent. Since trade consists e. g. in the exchange of the
respective labors of the shoemaker, miner, spinner, painter, etc., does
it follow that the value of shoes is most justly measured by the work
of a painter? On the contrary, Franklin meant that the value of shoes,
mining products, yarn, paintings, etc., is determined by abstract labor
which possesses no particular qualities and can, therefore, be measured
only quantitatively.[25] But since he does not develop the idea
that labor contained in exchange value is abstract universal labor
which assumes the form of social labor as a result of the universal
alienation of the products of individual labor, he necessarily fails to
recognize in money the direct embodiment of this alienated labor. For
that reason he sees no inner connection between money and labor which
creates exchange value, and considers money merely as an instrument
introduced from outside into the sphere of exchange for purposes of
technical convenience.[26] Franklin’s analysis of exchange value did
not exert any direct influence on the general trend of science, because
he discussed only special questions of political economy whenever there
was a definite practical occasion for it.

The contrast between useful work and labor which creates exchange
value agitated all Europe during the eighteenth century in the form of
this question: what particular kind of labor constitutes the source
of bourgeois wealth? It was thus assumed that not every kind of labor
which is realized in use-values or yields certain products does
thereby directly create wealth. With the physiocrats, however, as well
as with their opponents, the burning question was not, what kind of
labor creates _value_, but which is it that creates _surplus value_.
They approached the problem in its complicated form before they had
solved it in its elementary form; such is the historical course of
all sciences leading them by a labyrinth of intersecting paths to the
real starting points. Unlike other builders, science not only erects
castles in the air, but constructs separate stories of the building,
before it has laid the foundation. Without dwelling any longer on the
physiocrats and omitting quite a number of Italian economists who in
some more or less ingenious ideas came close to a correct analysis
of the nature of commodity,[27] we pass at once to the first Briton
who elaborated the general system of bourgeois economics, Sir James
Steuart.[28] His idea of exchange value as well as all the abstract
categories of political economy still seem to be with him in the
process of differentiation from the material elements they represent
and therefore appear quite vague and unsettled. In one place he
determines _real value by labor-time_ (“what a workman can perform in
a day”), but immediately creates confusion by introducing the elements
of wages and raw material.[29] In another place his struggle with the
material substance of the subject he treats of is revealed even more
strikingly. He calls the material of nature contained in a commodity,
such as the silver in a silver plate, its “intrinsic worth,” while the
labor-time contained in it he calls “useful value.” The former, he says
“is ... something real in itself,” while “the value of the second must
be estimated according to the labour it has cost to produce it.... The
labour employed in the modification [of the substance] represents a
portion of a man’s time.”[30]

What distinguishes Steuart from his predecessors and followers is
his keen differentiation between specifically social labor which is
represented in exchange value, and concrete labor which produces
use-values. Labor, he says, which through its alienation creates
a universal equivalent, I call _industry_. Labor as industry he
distinguishes not only from concrete labor, but from all other social
forms of labor.[31] It is to him the capitalistic form of labor
in contrast to its antique and mediaeval forms. He is especially
interested in the difference between capitalistic and feudal labor, of
which he had observed the latter in its decaying forms both in Scotland
and on his extensive travels over the continent. Steuart knew, of
course, very well that products took on the form of commodities and
commodities, the form of money in precapitalistic epochs as well; but
he proves conclusively that it is only in the capitalistic period of
production that the commodity becomes the elementary and fundamental
form of wealth, and alienation [of commodities], the ruling form of
acquisition and that consequently labor creating exchange value is
specifically capitalistic in its character.[32]

After different forms of concrete labor, such as agriculture,
manufacture, navigation, trade, etc., had each in turn been declared
the true source of wealth, Adam Smith proclaimed labor in general,
and namely in its general social form of _division of labor_, to be
the only source of material wealth or use-values. While ignoring in
connection with the latter the part played by nature, he is troubled
by it when he comes to deal with purely social wealth i. e. exchange
value. To be sure, Adam determines the value of a commodity by the
labor-time contained in it, but relegates the actual application of
the principle to pre-Adamic times. In other words, what seems to him
true from the standpoint of simple commodity, ceases to be clear as
soon as the higher and more complex forms of capital, wage-labor,
rent, etc. take its place. This he expresses by saying, that the value
of commodities used to be measured by labor-time in the paradise
lost of bourgeois society, in which men dealt with each other not
as capitalists, wage-workers, landlords, tenants, usurers, etc., but
merely as plain producers of commodities which they exchanged. He
constantly confuses the determination of the value of commodities by
the labor-time contained in them with the determination of their value
by the value of labor. He becomes confused in working out the details
and fails to see the objective equalization of different kinds of labor
which the social process forcibly carries out, mistaking it for the
subjective equality of the labors of individuals.[33] The transition
from concrete labor to labor creating exchange value, i. e. to labor in
its fundamental capitalistic form he tries to derive from the _division
of labor_. Yet, while it is true that private exchange implies the
division of labor, it is false to maintain that division of labor
implies private exchange. Among the Peruvians, e. g., labor was divided
to an extraordinary extent, although there was no private exchange, no
exchange of products, as commodities.

Contrary to Adam Smith, David Ricardo elaborated with great clearness
the determination of the value of a commodity by labor-time and showed
that this law governs also such relations of capitalistic production
which seem to contradict it most. Ricardo confines his investigations
exclusively to the _quantitative determination of value_ and as regards
the latter he is at least conscious of the fact that the realization
of the law depends upon certain historical conditions. He says,
namely, that the determination of value by labor-time holds good for
commodities “only as can be increased in quantity by the exertion of
human industry, and on the production of which competition operates
without restraint.”[34] What he really means is that the law of value
presupposes for its full development an industrial society in which
production is carried on a large scale and free competition prevails,
i. e. the modern capitalist society. In all other respects, Ricardo
considers the capitalist form of labor as the eternal natural form of
social labor. He makes the primitive fisherman and the primitive hunter
straightway exchange their fish and game as owners of commodities, in
proportion to the labor-time embodied in these exchange values. On this
occasion he commits the anachronism of making the primitive fisherman
and primitive hunter consult the annuity tables in current use on the
London Exchange in the year 1817 in the calculation relating to their
instruments. The “parallelograms of Mr. Owen” seem to be the only form
of society outside of the bourgeois form with which he was acquainted.
Although confined within this bourgeois horizon, Ricardo analyzes the
bourgeois economy―which looks quite different to deeper insight than
it does on the surface―with such keen power of theoretical penetration
that Lord Brougham could say of him: “Mr. Ricardo seemed as if he had
dropped from another planet.”

In a direct controversy with Ricardo, Sismondi lays stress upon
the specifically social character of labor which creates exchange
value,[35] and says it is “characteristic of our economic progress” to
reduce the magnitude of value to the _necessary_ labor-time, to the
relation between the demand of society as a whole and the quantity of
labor which is sufficient to satisfy this demand.[36] Sismondi is no
more laboring under Boisguillebert’s idea, that labor which creates
exchange value is adulterated by money; but just as Boisguillebert
denounced money, so does Sismondi denounce large industrial capital.
In Ricardo political economy reached its climax, after recklessly
drawing its ultimate conclusions, while Sismondi supplemented it by
impersonating its doubts.

Since Ricardo gave to classical political economy its final shape,
having formulated and elaborated with the greatest clearness the law of
the determination of exchange value by labor-time, it is natural that
all the polemics among economists should center about him. Stripped
of its puerile[37] form this controversy comes down to the following
points:

_First_: Labor itself has exchange value, and different kinds of labor
have different exchange values. We get into a vicious circle by making
exchange value the measure of exchange value, because the measuring
exchange value needs a measure itself. This objection may be reduced
to the following problem: Given labor-time as the intrinsic measure
of exchange value, develop from that the determination of wages. The
theory of wages gives the answer to that.

_Second_: If the exchange value of a product is equal to the labor-time
contained in it, then the exchange value of one day of labor is equal
to the product of that labor. In other words, wages must be equal to
the product of labor.[38] But the very opposite is actually the case.
Ergo. this objection comes down to the following problem: How does
production, based on the determination of exchange value by labor-time
only, lead to the result that the exchange value of labor is less than
the exchange value of its product? This problem is solved by us in the
discussion of capital.

_Third_: The market price of commodities either falls below or rises
above its exchange value with the changing relations of supply and
demand. _Therefore_, the exchange value of commodities is determined by
the relation of supply and demand and not by the labor-time contained
in them. As a matter of fact, this queer conclusion merely amounts to
the question, how a market price based on exchange value can deviate
from that exchange value; or, better still, how does the law of
exchange value assert itself only in its antithesis? This problem is
solved in the theory of competition.

_Fourth_: The last and apparently the most striking objection, if
not raised in the usual form of queer examples: If exchange value
is nothing but mere labor-time contained in commodities, how can
commodities which contain no labor possess exchange-value, or in other
words, whence the exchange value of mere forces of nature? This problem
is solved in the theory of rent.




CHAPTER II.

MONEY OR SIMPLE CIRCULATION.


In a parliamentary debate on Sir Robert Peel’s Bank Act of 1844 and
1845, Gladstone remarked that not even love has made so many fools of
men as the pondering over the nature of money. He spoke of Britons to
Britons. The Dutch, on the contrary, who, from times of yore, have had,
Petty’s doubts notwithstanding, “angelical wits” for money speculation
have never lost their wits in speculations about money.

The main difficulty in the analysis of money is overcome as soon as
the evolution of money from commodity is understood. This point once
granted, it only remains to comprehend clearly the particular forms
of money, which is to some extent made difficult by the fact that all
bourgeois relations, being gilt or silver plated, have the appearance
of money relations, and money, therefore, seems to possess an endless
variety of forms, which have nothing in common with it.

In the following investigation only those forms of money are treated
of which directly grow out of the exchange of commodities; the forms
which belong to a higher stage of production, as e. g., credit money
will not be discussed here. For the sake of simplicity gold is assumed
throughout as the money commodity.


1. THE MEASURE OF VALUE.

The first process of circulation constitutes, so to say, the
theoretical preparatory process to actual circulation. To begin
with, commodities which are use-values by nature, acquire a form in
which they _appear_ in idea to each other as exchange values, as
definite quantities of incorporated _universal_ labor-time. The first
necessary step in this process is, as we have seen, the setting apart
by the commodities of a specific commodity, say _gold_, as the direct
incarnation of universal labor-time, or the universal equivalent. Let
us go back for a moment to the form in which commodities turn gold into
money.

  1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold

  1 quarter of wheat = 1 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of Mocca coffee = 1-1/4 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of potash = 1/2 ounce of gold

  1 ton of Brazil timber = 1-1/2 ounces of gold

  Y commodities = X ounces of gold

In the above series of equations iron, wheat, coffee, potash, etc.
appear to each other as embodiments, of homogeneous labor, namely,
as labor materialized in money, from which all the peculiarities of
the different kinds of concrete labor represented in the different
use-values are completely eliminated. As value they are all identical,
they are the incarnation of _the same_ labor, or _the same_ incarnation
of labor, viz., gold. As uniform embodiments of the same labor they
display only _one_ difference, a quantitative one, by appearing
as different quantities of value, because _unequal_ quantities of
labor-time are contained in their use-values. The mutual relation
of these separate commodities is that of embodiments of universal
labor-time, since they are related to universal labor-time as to an
excluded commodity, viz., gold. The same relation the development of
which causes commodities to appear to each other as exchange values,
causes the labor time contained in gold to appear as universal
labor-time, a given quantity of which is expressed in different
quantities of iron, wheat, coffee, etc,―in short, in the use-values
of all commodities, or is directly unfolded in the endless series of
commodity-equivalents. While all commodities express their exchange
values in gold, gold expresses its exchange value directly in all
commodities. While commodities assume the form of exchange value in
relation to each other, they lend to gold the form of the universal
equivalent, or of money.

Gold becomes the _measure of value_, because _all_ commodities measure
their exchange values in gold, in proportion as a certain quantity of
gold and a certain quantity of the commodity contain the same amount
of labor-time; and it is only by virtue of this function of being a
measure of value, in which capacity its own value is measured directly
in the entire series of commodity equivalents, that gold becomes
a universal equivalent or money. On the other hand, the exchange
value of all commodities is expressed in gold. In this expression,
the qualitative aspect is to be distinguished from the quantitative:
there is the exchange value of the commodity as the embodiment of the
same uniform labor-time; while the magnitude of value is exhaustively
expressed, since in the same proportion in which commodities are
equated to gold they are equated to one another. On the one hand the
_universal_ character of the labor-time contained in them is revealed;
on the other, its quantity is expressed in its golden equivalent. The
exchange value of commodities thus expressed in the form of a universal
equivalent and, moreover, as a numerical proportion of this equivalent,
in terms of one specific commodity, or represented in the form of a
series of commodities equated to one specific commodity, is PRICE.
Price is the form into which the exchange value of commodities is
converted when it _appears_ within the sphere of circulation.

By the same process by which commodities express their values in gold
prices, they turn gold into a measure of value i. e. into money. If
all of them were to measure their values in silver, wheat, or copper,
and therefore express them in the form of silver, wheat or copper
prices, then silver, wheat or copper would be measures of value and
consequently universal equivalents. In order to appear as prices in
circulation, commodities must be exchange values before they enter
circulation. Gold becomes the measure of value only because all
commodities estimate their exchange value in it.

The universality of this relation which is the result of evolution
and from which alone springs the function of gold as the measure of
value, implies however, that every single commodity is measured in
gold, in proportion to the labor-time contained in both; that the
actual common measure of the commodity and of gold is labor; or that
commodity and gold are passed for each other in direct barter as
equal exchange values. How this equalization actually takes place,
can not be discussed here when treating of simple circulation. So
much, however, is clear, that in countries producing gold and silver,
certain quantities of labor-time are directly embodied in definite
quantities of gold and silver, while in countries which do not produce
gold and silver the same result is reached in a round-about way, by
direct or indirect exchange of the commodities of those countries;
i. e. a definite portion of average national labor is given for a
definite quantity of labor-time, embodied in the gold and silver of the
mine-owning countries. In order to be able to serve as a measure of
value, gold must be as far as possible a _variable_ value, because it
can become the equivalent of other commodities only as an incarnation
of labor-time, and the same labor-time is realized in unequal volumes
of use-values with the change in the productive power of concrete
labor. In estimating all commodities in gold it is only assumed that
gold represents a given quantity of labor at a given moment, as was
done when the exchange value of any commodity was expressed in terms
of the use-value of any other commodity. As for the variations of the
value of gold, the law of exchange value formulated above holds good
in its case as well. If the exchange value of commodities remains
unchanged, then a general rise in their gold prices is possible only
in the case of a fall in the exchange value of gold. If the exchange
value of gold remains unchanged, a general rise of gold prices is
possible only when the exchange value of all commodities rises. The
reverse is true in case of a general fall in the prices of commodities.
If the value of an ounce of gold falls or rises in consequence of a
change in the labor-time required for its production, then the values
of all other commodities fall or rise to an equal extent. Thus, the
ounce of gold represents after the change, as it did before, a _given_
quantity of labor-time with regard to all commodities. The same
exchange values are now estimated in greater or smaller quantities
of gold than before, but they are estimated in proportion to the
magnitude of their values, and consequently retain the same proportion
to each other. The ratio 2 ÷ 4 ÷ 8 remains the same when expressed
as 1 ÷ 2 ÷ 4 or as 4 ÷ 8 ÷ 16. The change in the quantity of gold in
which exchange values are estimated with a variation in the value of
gold, interferes as little with the function of gold as a measure
of value, as the fifteen times smaller value of silver as compared
with that of gold interferes with the performance of that function
by the latter. Since labor-time is the common measure of gold and
commodities, and since gold figures as the measure of value only in so
far as all commodities are measured by it, the idea that money makes
commodities commensurable, is therefore a mere fiction of the process
of circulation.[39] It is rather the commensurability of commodities
as incorporated labor-time, that turns gold into money.

Commodities enter the process of exchange in the concrete form
of use-values. They are yet to be turned into the real universal
equivalent through their alienation. The determination of their prices
merely amounts to their ideal transformation into the universal
equivalent, a process of equation to gold which is yet to be realized.
But since commodities are, in their prices, transformed into gold only
in imagination, or are converted only into imaginary gold, and since
their money form is not differentiated as yet from their concrete
selves, it follows that gold has also been turned into money only
in imagination; it appears so far but as a measure of value, and in
fact definite quantities of gold serve merely as names for certain
quantities of labor-time. The form in which gold is crystallized in
money always depends upon the way in which commodities express their
own exchange value to each other.

Commodities now confront one another in a double capacity: actually as
use-values, ideally as exchange values. The twofold aspect of labor
contained in them is reflected in their mutual relations; the special
concrete labor being virtually present as their use-value, while
universal abstract labor-time is ideally represented in their price
in which commodities appear as commensurable embodiments of the same
value―substance differing merely in quantity.

The difference between exchange value and price appears to be merely
nominal or, as Adam Smith says, labor is the real price, and money
the nominal price of commodities. Instead of estimating the value of
one quarter of wheat in thirty days of labor, it is estimated in one
ounce of gold if one ounce of gold is the product of thirty days’
labor. However, far from this difference being merely nominal, all the
storms which threaten commodities in the actual process of circulation
center about it. Thirty days of labor are contained in a quarter of
wheat and it need not, therefore, be expressed in terms of labor-time.
But gold is a commodity distinct from wheat, and only in circulation
it can be ascertained, whether the quarter of wheat can be actually
turned into an ounce of gold as is anticipated in its price. That will
depend on whether or not it proves to be a use-value, whether or not
the quantity of labor-time contained in it is the quantity necessarily
required by society for the production of a quarter of wheat. The
commodity as such _is_ an exchange value, it _has_ a price. In this
difference between exchange value and price lies the demonstration of
the fact that the particular individual labor contained in a commodity
has first to be expressed through the process of alienation in terms
of its counterpart, i. e. as impersonal, abstract, universal and, only
in that form, social labor, viz. money. Whether it can be so expressed
seems to be a matter of chance. Thus, although the exchange value
of a commodity finds only ideally a distinct expression in price,
and the twofold character of labor contained in the commodity exists
as yet merely as two distinct forms of expression, and, although in
consequence thereof, the embodiment of universal labor-time, gold,
confronts actual commodities only as an imaginary measure of value, yet
the fact that exchange value exists as price, or that gold exists as a
measure of value implies the necessity of the alienation of commodities
for hard cash and the possibility of their non-alienation. In short,
here lies latent the entire contradiction which is inherent in the
fact that products are commodities or that the particular work of a
private individual can be of no account in society until it has taken
the very opposite form of abstract universal labor. For that reason,
the utopians, who want to have commodities but not money, who want a
system of production based on private exchange without the necessary
conditions underlying such a system, are consistent when they “destroy”
money not in its tangible form but in its nebulous illusory form of a
measure of value. Under the invisible measure of value there lurks the
hard cash.

The process by which gold has become the measure of value and exchange
value has been turned into price, being once assumed, all commodities
express in their prices but imagined quantities of gold of various
magnitudes. As such various quantities of the same thing, gold, they
are equated, compared and measured with each other, and thus arises the
technical necessity of referring them to a definite quantity of gold
as a unit of measure, a unit which develops into a standard measure by
virtue of its divisibility into aliquot parts, which in their turn can
be subdivided into aliquot parts.[40] But quantities of gold as such
are measured by weight.

The standard of measure is thus found ready in the general measures
of weight of metals and, therefore, where-ever metallic circulation
is in vogue, these measures serve originally as standards of price.
Since commodities no more relate to each other as exchange values to
be measured by labor-time, but as magnitudes of the same denomination
measured in gold, the latter is transformed from a _measure of value_
into a _standard of price_. The comparison of prices with each other
as different quantities of gold is thus crystallized in figures which
correspond to an assumed quantity of gold and represent it as a
standard of aliquot parts. Gold as measure of value and as standard of
price has entirely different forms of manifestation and the confusing
of the two has resulted in the wildest of theories. Gold is a measure
of value as incorporated labor-time; it is the standard of price as
certain weight of metal. Gold becomes the measure of value by virtue
of its relation as exchange value to commodities as exchange values;
as standard of price, a definite quantity of gold serves as a unit
for other quantities of gold. Gold is the measure of value, because
its value is variable; it is the standard of price, because it is
fixed as a constant unit of weight. In this case, as in all cases of
measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of a
definite and unvarying unit of measure is all-important. The necessity
of settling upon a quantity of gold as a unit of measure and upon its
aliquot parts as subdivisions of that unit, has given rise to the
notion that a certain quantity of gold which has naturally a variable
value had been assigned a fixed ratio of value to the exchange values
of all commodities; the fact is overlooked that exchange values of
commodities are transformed into prices, i. e. into quantities of gold,
before gold develops as a standard of price. No matter how the value of
gold may vary, the ratios between the values of different quantities of
gold remain constant. Let the fall in the value of gold amount to 1000
per cent., still twelve ounces of gold will have a twelve times greater
value than one ounce of gold; and in prices the only thing considered
is the ratio between different quantities of gold. Since, on the other
hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its
weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot
parts. Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable
standard of price, no matter how much its value may vary.[41]

An historical process which, as we shall explain later, was determined
by the nature of metallic circulation, led to the result that the
same denomination of weight was retained for a constantly changing
and decreasing weight of precious metals in their function of a
standard of price. Thus the English pound sterling denotes less than
one-third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the Union,
only 1-36; the French livre, 1-74; the Spanish Maravedi, less than
1-1000; the Portuguese Rei, a still smaller fraction. Such was the
historical origin of the discrepancy between the current money names
of various weights of metals and their weight denominations.[42]
Since the determination of the unit of measure, of its aliquot parts,
and of their names is purely conventional, and since they should
possess within the sphere of circulation the character of universality
and compulsion, they had to be settled _by law_. The purely formal
operation thus devolved upon the government.[43] The metal which
was to serve as the money material, was found already adopted in
the community. In different countries the legal standard of price
is naturally different. In England e. g. the ounce as a weight of
metal is divided into pennyweights, grains and carats Troy, but the
ounce of gold as the unit of money is divided into 3 7-8 sovereigns,
the sovereign into 20 shillings, the shilling into 12 pence, so that
100 pounds of 22 carat gold (1200 ounces) = 4672 sovereigns and 10
shillings. In the world market, however, where national boundaries
disappear, these national characteristics of the measure of money also
disappear and give place to the general measures of weight of metals.

The price of a commodity or the quantity of gold into which it is
ideally transformed, is, therefore, now expressed in the names of
coins of the gold standard. Thus, instead of saying: a quarter of
wheat is worth an ounce of gold, it is said in England to be worth 3£
17s. 10-1/2d. All prices are thus expressed in the same denominations.
The peculiar form which commodities lend to their exchange values is
transformed into a _money-denomination_ by which commodities tell each
other how much they are worth. Money in its turn becomes _money of
account_.[44]

We transform commodities into money of account, in our mind, on paper,
in conversation, whenever it is a question of expressing any kind of
wealth in terms of exchange value.[45] For that transformation we need
the gold substance, but only in imagination. In order to estimate the
value of a thousand bales of cotton in a certain number of ounces of
gold and then to express this number of ounces in the denominations of
the ounce, £. s. d., not a single atom of gold is required. Thus, not
a single ounce of gold was in circulation in Scotland before Robert
Peel’s Bank Act of 1845, although the gold ounce, expressed in its
English standard of account, 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d., served as the legal
standard of price. In a similar manner silver serves as standard of
price in the trade between Siberia and China, although that trade
virtually amounts to barter. It is, therefore, immaterial to money,
as money of account, whether or not its entire unit of measure or the
fractions thereof are really coined. In England, at the time of William
the Conqueror, 1£, then a pound of pure silver, and the shilling, 1-20
of a pound, existed only as money of account, while the penny, 1-240
of a pound of silver, was the largest silver coin in existence. On
the other hand, there are no shillings and pence in England to-day,
although they are legal denominations for certain parts of an ounce of
gold. Money as money of account may exist exclusively in idea, while
the money in actual existence may be coined according to an entirely
different standard. Thus the money in circulation in many English
colonies of North America consisted until late in the eighteenth
century of Spanish and Portuguese coins, although the money of account
was throughout the same as in England.[46]

Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price,
appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities,
and that, therefore, the sum of 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d. may signify, on
the one hand, an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value
of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been called its
_mint-price_. Hence, there sprang up the extraordinary notion that
the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in
contradistinction to all other commodities, its price is _fixed_ by
the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning
names to definite weights of gold is the same thing as fixing the
value of those weights.[47] In so far as gold serves as one of the
elements in determining price, i. e., where it performs the function
of money of account, it not only has no _fixed_ price, but has _no_
price whatever. In order to have a price, i. e., in order to express
itself in a _specific_ commodity as a _universal_ equivalent that
other commodity would have to play the same exclusive role in the
process of circulation as gold. But two commodities excluding all other
commodities mutually exclude each other. Therefore, wherever gold and
silver have by law been made to perform side by side the function of
money or of a measure of value it has always been tried, but in vain,
to treat them as one and the same material. To assume that there is an
invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a
given quantity of labor-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact,
that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given
mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a
given mass of gold. From the reign of Edward III to the time of George
II, the history of money in England consists of one long series of
perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between
the values of gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real
values. At one time gold was too high; at another, silver. The metal
that for the time being was estimated below its value was withdrawn
from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio between the two metals
was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio soon came into
conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and
transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a
consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far
more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver,
and its expulsion from circulation by gold. During the years 1855,
1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold imports over gold exports
amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver exports over silver
imports was £14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both
metals are legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender,
so that every one has the option of paying in either metal, the metal
that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every other commodity,
measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone serves
in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience
and history with regard to this question is simply that, where two
commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in
practice one alone maintains that position.[48]


B. THEORIES OF THE UNIT OF MEASURE OF MONEY.

The circumstance that commodities are converted into gold only in ideas
as prices and that gold is therefore turned into money only in idea,
gave rise to the theory of the _ideal unit of measure of money_. Since,
in the determination of prices, gold and silver serve only ideally
as money of account, it was asserted that the names pound, shilling,
pence, thaler, franc, etc., instead of denoting certain weights of
gold and silver or labor incorporated in some way, stood rather for
ideal atoms of value. Thus, if, e. g., the value of an ounce of silver
should rise it would contain more such atoms and would therefore have
to be estimated and coined in a greater number of shillings. This
doctrine, revived again during the last commercial crisis in England
and even voiced in Parliament in two separate reports attached to the
report of the select Committee on the Bank Acts sitting in July, 1858,
dates from the end of the seventeenth century.

At the time of the accession of William III., the English mint-price
of an ounce of silver was 5s. 2d., or 1-62 of an ounce of silver was
equal to a penny; 12 of these pence were called a shilling. According
to that standard, a piece of silver weighing, say, 6 ounces, would be
coined into thirty-one coins, each called a shilling. But the _market
price_ of an ounce of silver rose above its _mint price_, from 5s. 2d.
to 6s. 3d., or, in order to buy an ounce of silver bullion 6s. 3d. had
to be paid. How could the market price of an ounce of silver rise above
its mint price, when the mint price is merely a reckoning name for
aliquot parts of an ounce of silver? The riddle was easily solved. Out
of £5,600,000 of silver money which was in circulation at that time,
four millions were worn out, clipped and debased. A trial disclosed
that £57,000 of silver which were supposed to weigh 220,000 ounces,
weighed only 141,000 ounces. The mint went on coining according to
the same standard, but light-weighted shillings in actual circulation
represented smaller parts of an ounce than their name implied. Hence,
a greater quantity of these light-weighted shillings had to be paid in
the market for an ounce of silver bullion. When a general recoinage
was decided upon in consequence of the derangement that had been
produced, LOWNDES, the Secretary of the Treasury, declared that the
value of an ounce of silver had risen and therefore it must henceforth
be coined into 6s. 3d. instead of into 5s. 2d. as heretofore. His
argument practically amounted to the assertion that the rise in the
value of the ounce caused a fall in the value of its aliquot parts.
His false theory, however, served merely as an embellishment for a
just, practical purpose. The government debts were contracted in light
shillings, were they to be paid in heavy ones? Instead of saying pay
back four ounces of silver, when you had received nominally five ounces
but virtually only four, he said pay back nominally five ounces but
reduce the metallic contents to four ounces and call a shilling what
you had called four-fifths of a shilling heretofore. Thus Lowndes
practically adhered to the metallic weight while theoretically he clung
to the reckoning name. His adversaries who clung only to the name
and therefore declared the 25 to 50 per cent. lighter shilling to be
identical with the full-weight shilling maintained on the contrary that
they adhered to the metallic weight.

JOHN LOCKE, who was an advocate of the new bourgeoisie in all forms,
the manufacturers against the working classes and paupers, the
commercial class against the old fashioned usurers, the financial
aristocracy against the state debtors, and who went so far as to prove
in his own work that the bourgeois reason is the normal human reason,
also took up the challenge against Lowndes. John Locke carried the day
and money borrowed at ten or fourteen shillings to a guinea was repaid
in guineas of twenty shillings.[49] SIR JAMES STEUART sums up the
entire transaction as follows: “ ... the state gained considerably upon
the score of taxes, as well as the creditors upon their capitals and
interest; and the nation, which was the principal loser, was pleased;
because their _standard_ (The standard of their own value) was not
debased.”[50] Steuart thought that the nation would prove more alert
with the further development of commerce. He was mistaken. About 120
years later the same _quid pro quo_ was repeated.

It was just in the order of things that Bishop BERKELEY, the
representative of a mystical idealism in English philosophy, should
have given a theoretical turn to the doctrine of the ideal unit
of measure of money, something which the practical “Secretary to
the Treasury” had failed to do. He asks: “Whether the terms Crown,
Livre, Pound Sterling, etc., are not to be considered as Exponents
or Denominations of such Proportion? [namely proportions of abstract
value as such.] And whether Gold, Silver, and Paper are not Tickets
or Counters for Reckoning, Recording and Transferring thereof? (of
the proportion of value). Whether _Power_ to command the Industry of
others be not real Wealth? And whether Money be not in Truth, Tickets
or Tokens for conveying and recording such Power, and whether it be of
great consequence what Materials the Tickets are made of?”[51] Here
we find a confusion, first of the measure of value and the standard
of price, and secondly of gold and silver as measures on the one hand
and mediums of circulation on the other. Because precious metals can
be replaced by tokens in the process of circulation Berkeley comes to
the conclusion that these tokens represent nothing, i. e., only the
abstract idea of value.

SIR JAMES STEUART had so fully developed the theory of the ideal
unit of measure of money, that his successors―unconscious successors
since they do not know him―have added to it neither a new version
nor even a new example. “Money, which I call of account, is no more
than an arbitrary scale of equal parts, invented for measuring the
respective value of things vendible. Money of account, therefore, is
quite a different thing from money coin, which is price[52] and might
exist, although there was no such thing in the world as any substance
which could become an adequate and proportional equivalent, for every
commodity.... Money of account ... performs the same office with
regard to the value of things, that degrees, minutes, seconds, etc.,
do with regard to angles, or as scales do to geographical maps, or to
plans of any kind. In all these inventions, there is constantly some
denomination taken for the unit. ... The usefulness of all those
inventions being solely confined to the marking of proportion. Just so
the unit in money can have no invariable determinate proportion to any
part of value, that is to say, it cannot be fixed to any particular
quantity of gold, silver, or any other commodity whatsoever. The
unit once fixed, we can, by multiplying it, ascend to the greatest
value.... The value of commodities, therefore, depending upon a
general combination of circumstances relative to themselves and to the
fancies of men, their value ought to be considered as changing only
with respect to one another; consequently, anything which troubles or
perplexes the ascertaining those changes of proportion by the means
of a general, determinate and invariable scale, must be hurtful to
trade.... Money ... is an ideal scale of equal parts. If it be demanded
what ought to be the standard value of one part? I answer by putting
another question: What is the standard length of a degree, a minute, a
second? It has none ... but so soon as one part becomes determined by
the nature of a scale, all the rest must follow in proportion. Of this
kind of money ... we have two examples. The bank of Amsterdam presents
us with the one, the coast of Angola with the other.”[53]

Steuart speaks here simply of the part money plays in circulation
as the _standard of price_ and _money of account_. If different
commodities are marked in the price-list at 15s., 20s., 36s.,
respectively, then I care, in fact, neither for the silver substance,
nor for the name of the shilling when comparing the magnitudes of their
values. The ratios between the numbers 15, 20, 36, tell everything, and
the number 1 has become the only unit of measure. Only the abstract
proportion of numbers can at all serve as a purely abstract expression
of proportion. In order to be consistent, Steuart should have dropped
not only gold and silver, but their legal baptismal names as well.
Since he does not understand the nature of the transformation of the
measure of value into a standard of price, he naturally believes that
the definite quantity of gold which serves as a unit of measure relates
as a measure not to other quantities of gold, but to values as such.
Since commodities appear as quantities of the same denomination through
the conversion of their exchange values into prices, he denies that
property of the measure which reduces them to one denomination; and
since in this comparison of different quantities of gold the quantity
of gold which serves as a unit of measure is conventional, he does not
see the necessity of fixing it at all. Instead of calling 1-360 part
of a circle degree, he might give that name to 1-180th part; the right
angle would then be measured by 45 degrees instead of 90, and acute and
obtuse angles would be measured accordingly. Nevertheless, the measure
of the angle would remain, then, as before, first a qualitatively
definite mathematical figure, the circle, and second a quantitatively
definite part of the circle. As for Steuart’s economic illustrations,
he refutes his own argument with one and does not prove anything with
the other. The bank money of Amsterdam was, in fact, merely the
reckoning name for Spanish doubloons, which retained their full weight
by lying idly in the bank vaults, while the circulating coins became
thinner from hard rubbing against the outer world. And as for the
African idealists we have to abandon them to their fate until critical
travelers will tell us more about them.[54] The French assignat
could be called an almost ideal money in Steuart’s sense: “_National
property. Assignation of 100 francs._” To be sure, the use-value which
the assignation was supposed to represent, namely, the confiscated
land, was indicated here, but the quantitative definition of the unit
of measure was forgotten and “the franc” became a meaningless word.
How much or how little land the assignation franc represented depended
on the results of the public auctions. In practice, however, the
assignation franc circulated as a token of value of silver money and
its depreciation was, therefore, measured by this silver standard.

The period of the suspension of cash payments by the Bank of England
was hardly more fruitful of war-bulletins than of money theories. The
depreciation of bank notes and the rise of the market price of gold
above its mint price called forth again the doctrine of the ideal
unit of money on the part of some of the advocates of the Bank. Lord
Castlereagh found the classical confused expression for the confused
idea by speaking of the unit of measure of money as “a sense of value
in reference to currency as compared with commodities.” When a few
years after the peace of Paris conditions permitted the resumption of
cash payments, the same question which had been stirred up by Lowndes
under William III., came up, hardly changed in form. An enormous
government debt, as well as a mass of private debts, accumulated in
twenty years, fixed obligations, etc., had been contracted on the
basis of depreciated bank notes. Were they to be paid back in bank
notes of which £4672, 10s. nominal, actually represented 100 pounds
of 22 carat gold? THOMAS ATTWOOD, a banker of Birmingham, came forth
as _Lowndes redivivus_. The creditors were to receive nominally as
many shillings as had been nominally borrowed, but if about 1-78 of
an ounce of gold constituted a shilling according to the old standard
of coinage, then say 1-90 of an ounce should now be christened a
shilling. Attwood’s adherents are known as the Birmingham school of
“little shillingmen.” The controversy over the ideal money unit, which
had started in 1819, still went on in 1845 between Sir Robert Peel and
Attwood, whose own wisdom, as far as the function of money as a measure
is concerned, is exhaustively summed up in the following passage, in
which, referring to Sir Robert Peel’s controversy with the Birmingham
Chamber of Commerce, he says: “The substance of your queries is ...
in what sense is the word pound to be used?... To what will the sum
one pound be equivalent?... Before I venture a reply I must enquire
what constitutes a standard of value?... Is £3 17s. 10-1/2d. an _ounce_
of gold, or is it only of the _value_ of an ounce of gold? If £3 17s.
10-1/2d. be an ounce of gold, why not call things by their proper
names, and, dropping the terms pounds, shillings and pence, say ounces,
pennyweights and grains?... If we adopt the terms ounces, pennyweights
and grains of gold, as our monetary system, we should pursue a direct
system of barter.... But if gold be estimated as of the _value_ of
£3 17s. 10-1/2d. per ounce ... how is this ... that much difficulty
has been experienced at different periods to check gold from rising
to £5 4s. per ounce, and we now notice that gold is quoted at £3 17s.
9d. per ounce?... The expression _pound_ has reference to value, but
not a fixed standard value.... The term pound is the _ideal unit_....
Labour is the parent of cost and gives the relative value to gold or
iron. _Whatever denomination of words are used to express the daily or
weekly labour of a man_, such words express the cost of the commodity
produced.”[55]

In the last words the hazy conception of the ideal money measure melts
away and its real meaning breaks through. The reckoning names of gold,
pound sterling, shilling, etc., should be names for definite quantities
of labor-time. Since labor-time constitutes the substance and the
intrinsic measure of values, these names would then actually represent
definite proportions of value. In other words, labor-time is maintained
to be the true unit of measure of money. With this we leave the
Birmingham school, but should add in passing that the doctrine of the
ideal measure of money acquired new importance in the controversy over
the question of the convertibility or non-convertibility of bank notes.
If paper receives its name from gold or silver, then the convertibility
of a note or its exchangeability for gold or silver remains an economic
law, no matter what the civil law may be. Thus a Prussian paper thaler,
although legally inconvertible, would immediately depreciate if it were
worth less than a silver thaler in ordinary trade, i. e., if it were
not practically convertible. The consistent advocates of inconvertible
paper money in England, therefore, sought refuge in the ideal measure
of money. If the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are names of
certain quantities of atoms of value, of which a commodity absorbs or
loses now more, now less in exchange for other commodities, then an
English £5 note, e. g., is just as independent of its relation to gold
as of that to iron and cotton. Since its title would no more imply
its theoretical equality with a certain quantity of gold or any other
commodity, the demand for its convertibility, i. e., for its practical
equality with a definite quantity of a specified thing would be
excluded by the very conception of the note.

The theory of labor-time as the direct measure of money was first
systematically developed by JOHN GRAY.[56] He makes a National Central
Bank ascertain through its branches the labor-time consumed in the
production of various commodities. The producer receives an official
certificate of value in exchange for his commodity. i. e., he gets a
receipt for as much labor-time as his commodity contains,[57] and these
bank notes of one week’s labor, one day’s labor, one hour’s labor,
etc., serve at the same time as a check for an equivalent in all other
commodities stored in the bank warehouses.[58] This is the fundamental
principle carefully worked out in detail and based throughout on
existing English institutions. Under this system, says Gray, “to
sell for money may be rendered, at all times, precisely as easy as it
now is to buy with money; ... production would become the uniform and
never-failing cause of demand.”[59] The precious metals would lose
their “privilege” as against other commodities and “take their proper
place in the market beside butter and eggs, and cloth and calico, and
then the value of the precious metals will concern us just as little
... as the value of the diamond.”[60] “Shall we retain our fictitious
standard of value, gold, and thus keep the productive resources of the
country in bondage? or, shall we resort to the natural standard of
value, labour, and thereby set our productive resources free?”[61]

Labor-time being the intrinsic measure of value, why should there be
another external measure side by side with it? Why does exchange value
develop into price? Why do all commodities estimate their value in one
exclusive commodity, which is thus converted into a special embodiment
of exchange value into money? That was the problem which Gray had
to solve. Instead of solving it, he imagined that commodities could
be related directly to each other as products of social labor. But
they can relate to each other only in their capacity of commodities.
Commodities are the direct products of isolated independent private
labors, which have to be realized as universal social labor through
their alienation in the process of private exchange, that is to say,
labor based on the production of commodities becomes social labor only
through universal alienation of individual labors. But by assuming
that the labor-time contained in commodities is _directly social_
labor-time, Gray assumes it to be common labor-time or labor-time of
directly associated individuals. Under such conditions a specific
commodity like gold or silver could not confront other commodities as
the incarnation of universal labor, and exchange value would not be
turned into price; but, on the other hand, use-value would not become
exchange value, products would not become commodities and thus the
very foundation of the capitalistic system of production would be
removed. But that is not what Gray has in mind. _Products are to be
produced as commodities, but are not to be exchanged as commodities._
He entrusts a national bank with the carrying out of this pious
wish. On the one hand, society, through the bank, makes individuals
independent of the conditions of private exchange, and on the other,
it allows them to go on producing on the basis of private exchange.
The logic of things, however, compels Gray to do away with one
condition of capitalistic production after another, although he wishes
to “reform” only the money system which results from the exchange of
commodities. Thus he transforms capital into national capital,[62]
land into national property,[63] and if his bank is to be watched
closely, it will be found that it not only receives commodities with
one hand and issues certificates for work delivered with the other, but
that it regulates production as well. In his last work, “Lectures on
Money,” in which Gray is anxious to demonstrate that his labor-money
is a purely bourgeois reform, he gets tangled up in even more glaring
contradictions.

Every commodity is directly money. That was Gray’s theory deducted
from his incomplete and, therefore, false analysis of commodities.
The “organic” structure of “labor money,” the “national bank” and the
“ware-docks” are mere fantastic visions in which the dogma is made
by a legerdemain to appear to us as a universal law. The dogma that
a commodity is money or that the isolated labor of the individual
contained in it is direct social labor, will of course not become
true through the mere fact that a bank believes in it and carries on
operations accordingly. It is more likely that bankruptcy would play
in that case the part of the practical critic. What remains concealed
in Gray’s writings and hidden from himself as well, namely, that
labor-money is a well-sounding economic phrase for the pious wish to
get rid of money, and with money, of exchange value, and with exchange
value, of commodities, and with commodities, of the capitalistic mode
of production, was clearly expressed by some English socialists of whom
a few preceded and others followed Gray.[64]

But it remained for Mr. Proudhon and his school to preach in
all earnest the degradation of _money_ and the exaltation of the
_commodity_ as the gist of socialism and thus to reduce socialism to an
elementary misconception of the necessary connection between commodity
and money.[65]


2. THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION.

After the commodity has received in the process of price determination
the form in which it becomes capable of circulation, and after gold has
acquired the character of money in the same process, circulation will
both present and solve the contradictions which are inherent in the
process of exchange of commodities. The actual exchange of commodities,
i. e., the social interchange of matter consists of a change of form in
which is unfolded the double character of the commodity as use-value
and exchange value, and at the same time its own change of form is
crystallized in distinct forms of money. To describe this change of
form is to describe circulation. As we have seen, given a world of
commodities and with it a system of division of labor, commodity is but
a developed form of exchange value; in the same manner, circulation
implies a steady stream of exchange transactions which are being
continually renewed on all sides. The second assumption we make is that
commodities enter the process of exchange with a _definite price_ or
that they appear to each other in that process in a double capacity,
really as use-values, ideally―in price―as exchange values.

The liveliest streets of London are crowded with stores whose show
windows are filled with the riches of the world, Indian shawls,
American revolvers, Chinese porcelain, Parisian corsets, Russian furs
and tropical spices, but all of these things of joy bear fatal white
labels marked with Arabian figures with the laconic characters £, s.,
d. Such is the picture of the commodity appearing in circulation.


a. THE METAMORPHOSIS OF COMMODITIES.

On close examination the process of circulation is seen to consist of
two distinct cycles. If we denote commodity by the letter C and money
by the letter M we can express these two forms as follows:

  C―M―C
  M―C―M.

In this chapter we are interested exclusively in the first form, i. e.,
in the form which serves as the direct expression of the circulation of
commodities.

The process C―M―C consists of the movement C―M, the exchange of the
commodity for money, or _selling_; the opposite movement M―C, exchange
of money for a commodity, or _buying_; and of the unity of the two
movements C―M―C, exchange of the commodity for money in order to
exchange the money for a commodity, or _selling_ in order to _buy_.
But the result which marks the end of the process is C―C, exchange of
commodity for commodity, real interchange of matter.

If we look at it from the extreme end of the first commodity, C―M―C
represents its transformation into gold and its retransformation from
gold into a commodity; a movement in which the commodity exists first
as a particular use-value, then divests itself of that character,
acquires the character of exchange value or universal equivalent,
in which capacity it has nothing in common with its natural form,
then throws off the last form as well to remain finally an actual
use-value for the satisfaction of particular wants. In this last form
it falls out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption.
The entire process of circulation C―M―C thus includes the combined
series of metamorphoses, which every single commodity undergoes
in order to become a direct use-value to its possessor. The first
metamorphosis is accomplished in the first phase of the circulation
process, C―M; the second in the last phase, M―C; and the entire
process constitutes the _curriculum vitae_ of the commodity. But
the process C―M―C represents the combined metamorphosis of a single
commodity and constitutes at the same time the sum of certain one-sided
metamorphoses of other commodities, since every metamorphosis of the
first commodity constitutes its transformation into another commodity
and therefore the transformation of the other commodity into it; hence
it constitutes a twofold transformation which takes place at the same
stage of circulation. We must then consider separately each of the two
processes of exchange into which circulation C―M―C breaks up.

C―M or _sale_: commodity C enters the process of circulation not only
as a particular use-value, e. g., a ton of iron, but as a use-value
of a certain price, say, £3 17s. 10-1/2d., or an ounce of gold.
While this price is on the one hand the exponent of the quantity of
labor-time contained in a ton of iron, i. e., of the magnitude of its
value, it at the same time expresses the pious wish of the iron to
become gold, i. e., to give to the labor-time it contains the aspect
of universal social labor-time. Unless this trans-substantiation takes
place, the ton of iron not only ceases to be a commodity, but even a
product, for it is a commodity only because it is a non-use-value to
its owner; that is to say, his labor counts as actual labor only in so
far as it is labor useful to others, and the thing is useful to him
only as abstract universal labor. It is, therefore, the business of
iron, or of its owner, to find that point in the world of commodities
where iron attracts gold. But this difficulty, the _salto mortale_
of the commodity, is overcome when the sale actually takes place, as
is assumed here on the analysis of simple circulation. When the ton
of iron is realized as a use-value through its alienation, i. e., by
passing from the hands in which it is a non-use-value to hands in which
it is a use-value, it at the same time realizes its price and from mere
imaginary gold it becomes real gold. In place of the name one ounce of
gold or £3 17s. 10-1/2d., an ounce of real gold has appeared, but the
ton of iron has cleared that place. Not only does the commodity―which
in its price had been ideally converted into gold―actually turn into
gold through the sale C―M, but gold, which as a measure of value had
been only ideal money and in fact figured merely as a money name of
commodities―is now turned into actual money[66] by the same process.
Just as gold became the ideal universal equivalent, because all
commodities measured their values by it, so does it now become the
absolutely alienable commodity, real money, because it is the product
of the universal alienation of commodities for it―and the sale C―M is
the process by means of which that universal alienation takes place.
But gold becomes real money only through sale, because the exchange
values of commodities were already ideal gold in their prices.

In the sale C―M, as well as in the purchase M―C, two commodities,
entities of exchange value and use-value, confront each other, but the
exchange value of the commodity exists only ideally as price; while
as regards gold, although it is really a use-value, its use-value
is confined only to its being the bearer of exchange value and is,
therefore, merely a formal use-value, having no relation to a real
individual want. The antithesis of use-value and exchange value is thus
distributed at the two extreme poles of C―M, so that the commodity
confronts gold as a use-value which has yet to realize in gold its
exchange value or its price, while gold confronts the commodity as an
exchange value, whose formal use-value is yet to be realized in the
commodity. Only through this duplication of the commodity as commodity
and gold, and, further, through the twofold and polar relation by
virtue of which each extreme represents but ideally what its opposite
is in reality and is in reality what its opposite is only ideally―in
short, only through the appearance of commodities as two-sided polar
opposites are the contradictions solved that are inherent in the
process of exchange.

So far we have considered C―M as sale, as the conversion of commodity
into money. But if we look at it from the other end, the same process
will assume the form M―C, or purchase, i. e., the conversion of
money into commodity. Sale is necessarily its opposite at the same
time; it is the former if we look at the process from one end, and
the latter if we regard the process from the other end. In practice
this process differs only in that the initiative in C―M originates
at the commodity end or with the seller, while in M―C it comes from
the money end or the buyer. In describing the first metamorphosis
of the commodity, its conversion into money as a result of the
completion of the first phase of circulation C―M, we assume at the
same time that another commodity has been converted into money and
is now in its second phase of circulation, M―C. Thus we get into a
vicious circle of assumptions. Circulation itself constitutes such a
vicious circle. If we did not consider M in M―C as the result of a
metamorphosis of another commodity, we would thereby take exchange out
of the process of circulation. But outside of the latter the form C―M
disappears and only two different Cs confront each other, say iron
and gold, the exchange of which does not constitute a part of the
process of circulation, being direct barter. Gold, at the source of
its production, is a commodity like any other commodity. Its relative
value and that of iron or of any other commodity is expressed here in
quantities in which they are mutually exchanged. But in the process
of circulation this operation is implied, the value of gold being
already given in the prices of commodities. Nothing can, therefore,
be more erroneous than the idea that gold and commodity enter into
the relation of direct barter _within the process of circulation_ and
that their relative values are ascertained through their exchange as
simple commodities. The illusion that gold is bartered as a simple
commodity for other commodities in the process of circulation is due to
the fact that prices represent equations in which certain quantities
of commodities are made equal to certain quantities of gold, i. e.,
that the commodities are made to relate to gold in its capacity
of money, as a universal equivalent, and, therefore, appear to be
directly exchangeable for it. In so far as the price of a commodity
is _realized_ in gold, it is exchanged for gold as a commodity, as a
particular embodiment of labor-time; but in so far as it is the _price_
that is realized in gold, the commodity is exchanged for gold in its
capacity of money and not of a commodity, i. e., it is exchanged for
gold as a universal embodiment of labor-time. But in either case the
quantity of gold for which the commodity is exchanged in the process
of circulation is not determined by exchange, but the exchange is
determined by the price of the commodity, i. e., by its exchange value
estimated in gold.[67]

Within the process of circulation gold appears in everybody’s hands as
the result of sale C―M. But since C―M, sale, is at the same time M―C,
purchase, it is apparent that while C, the commodity from which the
process starts, is passing through its first metamorphosis, another
commodity, which confronts it as the opposite pole M, is completing
its second metamorphosis and is, therefore, passing through the second
phase of circulation, while the first commodity is still in the first
phase of its course.

As a result of the first phase of circulation, the sale, we get
money which is the starting point of the second phase. In place of
the commodity in its first form appears its golden equivalent. This
result may now form a resting point, since the commodity in this
second form possesses a lasting existence of its own. The commodity,
a non-use-value in the hands of its possessor, is now on hand in an
always useful, since always exchangeable, form, and it depends upon
circumstances when and at what point of the surface of the commodity
world it will again enter circulation. Its formation into a gold
chrysalis constitutes an independent period in its life which may last
a greater or less length of time. While in the case of barter the
exchange of one particular use-value is directly bound up with the
exchange of another particular use-value, the universal character of
labor which creates exchange value is manifested in the separation and
lack of coincidence of acts of purchase and sale.

_M―C, purchase_, is the inverted movement of C―M and at the same time
the second or final metamorphosis of the commodity. As gold, i. e., in
the form of the universal equivalent, the commodity can be directly
represented in the use-values of all other commodities; the latter
aspire to gold as their hereafter, but at the same time indicate in
their prices the key in which it must sound in order that their bodies,
their use-values, may take the place of money, while their souls,
their exchange-values, may enter gold. The universal product of the
alienation of commodities is the absolutely alienable commodity. There
is no qualitative and only a quantitative limit to the transformation
of gold into commodity, namely, the limit of its own quantity or
magnitude of its value. “Everything is to be had for cash.” While in
the movement C―M, the commodity, through its alienation as a use-value,
realizes its own price and the use-value of somebody else’s money; it
realizes in the movement M―C, through its alienation as an exchange
value, its own use-value and the price of the other commodity. While
through the realization of its price the commodity transforms gold
into actual money, it turns gold into its merely fleeting money-form,
through its own retransformation. Since the circulation of commodities
implies an extensive division of labor and consequently a diversity of
wants on the part of individuals, a diversity which bears an inverse
ratio to the specialization of their own products, the purchase M―C may
appear as an equation with one commodity equivalent or split up into a
series of commodity-equivalents limited by the variety of the demands
of the purchaser and by the amount of money in his possession. Just as
a sale is a purchase, so is a purchase a sale. M―C is at the same time
C―M, but the initiative belongs in this case to gold or the purchaser.

Coming back now to C―M―C, or to circulation as a whole, it is apparent
that it contains the combined series of metamorphoses through which
a commodity passes. But at the same time as one commodity enters the
first phase of its circulation and completes its first metamorphosis,
another commodity enters the second phase of circulation, completes its
second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation; the first commodity
enters at the same time the second phase of circulation completes
its second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation, while a third
commodity enters circulation, passes through the first phase of its
course completing the first metamorphosis.

Thus, the combined circulation C―M―C, as a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity always constitutes at the same time the end of the complete
metamorphosis of another commodity and the beginning of a complete
metamorphosis of a third commodity, i. e., a series without beginning
or end. To illustrate this let us call C in either extreme C’ and C”
respectively, in order to distinguish the commodities, the series
reading thus: C’―M―C”. The first member, C’―M, presupposes in fact
that M is the result of another transaction C―M, and is thus itself
merely the last member of a series C―M―C’, while the second part M―C”
is merely a result of C”―M, or appears as the first part of C”―M―C’”,
and so on. Furthermore, although M is the result of only _one_ sale,
it appears that the last part M―C, may be represented as M―C’ + M―C”
+ M―C’”, etc., i. e., it may be split up into a number of purchases,
and consequently a number of sales, or into a number of first members
of new complete metamorphoses of commodities. Since the complete
metamorphosis of a single commodity thus appears as a link not only
of one endless chain of metamorphoses, but of many such chains, the
process of circulation in the world of commodities presents a hopeless
confusion of intertwined movements constantly ending and starting anew
at a countless number of points. But every single sale or purchase
stands as an independent isolated act, whose supplemental act may be
separated from it in time and place, and therefore does not need to
follow it directly as its continuation. Every separate process of
circulation, C―M or M―C, as a transformation of one commodity into
use-value and of another into money, i. e., as the first and second
phases of circulation respectively forms an independent halting
point from either direction; but, on the other hand, all commodities
commence their second metamorphosis in the common form of the universal
equivalent, gold, and stop at the starting point of the second phase of
circulation; for that, reason any M―C dovetails in actual circulation
with any C―M; the second chapter in the life-course of one commodity
with the first chapter of that of another commodity. A, e. g., sells
£2 worth of iron. He thus completes the transaction C―M or the first
metamorphosis of commodity iron, but postpones his purchase until some
other time. At the same time B, who sold 2 quarters of wheat for £6 a
fortnight since, buys with the same £6 a coat and trousers of Moses &
Son, thus completing M―C or the second metamorphosis of the commodity,
wheat.

The two transactions M―C and C―M appear here merely as links of one
chain, because a commodity expressed in gold looks like any other
commodity, and one cannot tell by the looks of the gold whether it is
transformed iron or transformed wheat. C―M―C appears, therefore, in the
actual process of circulation as a jumble of countless accidentally
coinciding or successively following members of different complete
metamorphoses. The actual process of circulation thus appears not as
a complete metamorphosis of a commodity, not as its movement through
opposite phases, but as a mere agglomeration of many accidentally
coinciding or successive purchases and sales. The process thus loses
all clearness of outline which is so much more the case since every
single act of circulation, e. g., sale, is at the same time its
opposite, purchase, and vice versa. On the other hand, the process
of circulation is nothing but the movement of metamorphoses in the
world of commodities and, therefore, must reflect them also in its
movement as a whole. How that reflection takes place we shall consider
in the following chapter. It may be added here that in C―M―C the two
extreme Cs constitute two forms of commodities which do not bear the
same relation to M. The first C relates to money as a commodity of a
special class to a universal commodity, while money relates to the
second C as a universal commodity to an individual commodity. C―M―C
can, therefore, be reduced by abstract logic to the final form S―U―I in
which S, standing for species, forms the first extreme; U, signifying
universality, forms the connecting medium, and I, individuality,
constitutes the last extreme.

The owners of commodities entered the sphere of circulation simply
as guardians of commodities. Within that sphere they confront each
other in the opposite roles of buyer and seller, one as a personified
sugar-loaf, the other as personified gold. As soon as the sugar-loaf
is turned into gold, the seller becomes a buyer. These definite social
functions are no outgrowths of human nature, but are the products
of relations of exchange between men who produce their goods in the
form of commodities. They are so far from being purely individual
relations between buyer and seller that both enter this relation
only to the extent that their individual labor is disregarded and
is turned into money as labor of _no_ individual. Just as it is,
therefore, childish to consider these economic bourgeois roles of
buyer and seller as eternal social forms of human individuality, so it
is on the other hand, preposterous to lament in them the extinction
of individuality.[68] They are the necessary manifestations of
individuality at a certain stage of the social system of production.
Moreover, in the opposition of buyer and seller the antagonistic nature
of capitalistic production is expressed as yet so superficially
and as mere matter of form, that this opposition belongs also to
precapitalistic forms of society, since it merely requires that
the mutual relations of individuals should be those of owners of
commodities.

Now, if we consider the result of C―M―C, it comes down to mere
interchange of matter, C―C. A commodity has been exchanged for a
commodity, a use-value for a use-value, and the transformation of the
commodity into money, or the commodity in its form of money, serves
merely as a means of effecting this interchange of matter. Money thus
appears merely as a _medium of exchange_ of commodities; not as a
medium of exchange in general, but as a means of exchange in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., a _medium of circulation_.[69]

We have seen that the process of circulation of commodities comes to
a completion in C―C, appearing as mere barter carried on by means of
money; further, that C―M―C represents in general not only two isolated
processes, but their dynamic union as well; but to draw from that the
conclusion that purchase and sale form an indivisible unit, is a mode
of thinking the criticism of which belongs to the domain of logic,
and not to that of economics. The separation of purchase and sale in
the process of exchange destroys all local, primitive, patriarchal
and naively genial barriers to interchange of matter in society. It
is, moreover, the general form of the separation of the points of
coincidence and opposition in this interchange, carrying within it the
possibility of commercial crises, because the antagonism of commodity
and money is the abstract and general form of all antagonisms with
which the capitalistic system of labor is pregnant. Hence, circulation
of money is possible without crises, but crises can not occur without
money circulation. In other words, where labor based on the system of
private exchange has not reached the stage marked by the existence
of money, it is less capable of producing those phenomena which
presuppose the full development of the capitalistic mode of production.
Bearing this in mind we can appreciate the depth of the criticism
which proposes to do away with the “shortcomings” of capitalistic
production by abolishing the “privilege” enjoyed by the precious metals
and introducing a so-called “rational monetary system.” As a sample
of economic defence of an opposite character may serve the following
piece of reasoning which has been proclaimed exceedingly keen. JAMES
MILL, the father of the well-known English economist, John Stuart Mill,
says: “Whatever ... be the amount of the annual produce, it never can
exceed the amount of the annual demand.... Of two men who perform an
exchange, the one does not come with only a supply, the other with only
a demand; each of them comes with both a demand and a supply.... The
supply which he brings is the instrument of his demand; and his demand
and supply are of course exactly equal to one another. It is therefore,
impossible that there should ever be in any country a commodity or
commodities in quantity greater than the demand, without there being,
to an equal amount, some other commodity or commodities in quantity
less than the demand.”[70]

Mill restores the balance by turning the process of circulation into
direct barter and then smuggling into direct barter the character of
buyer and seller borrowed by him from the process of circulation. To
put it in his own confused language, during certain periods when all
commodities are unsaleable there are really more buyers than sellers
of one commodity, _money_, and more sellers than buyers of _all other
money_, commodities; such was, e. g., the case at certain moments
during the commercial crisis of 1857-58 in London and Hamburg. The
metaphysical balance of purchases and sales amounts to this, that
every purchase is a sale and every sale is a purchase, which is a poor
consolation to the guardian of the commodity who can not bring about
its sale and therefore can not buy.[71]

The separation of sale and purchase makes possible a large number of
fictitious transactions side by side with genuine trade before the
final exchange between the producer and the consumer of commodities
takes place. It enables a host of parasites to penetrate the process of
production and exploit the separation. But this, again, means that with
money as the universal form of labor under the capitalist system, there
is _the possibility_ of the development of its contradictions.


b. THE CIRCULATION OF MONEY.

Actual circulation appears at first sight as a mass of purchases and
sales accidentally taking place side by side. In buying as in selling,
commodities and money always stand in the same mutual relation: the
seller, on the side of the commodity; the buyer, on that of money.
Money as a medium of circulation always appears therefore as _a means
of purchase_; and in that way the difference in its destinations in
the opposite phases of the metamorphosis of the commodity becomes
indistinguishable.

Money passes into the hands of the seller in the same transaction in
which the commodity passes into the hands of the buyer. Commodities
and money thus flow in opposite directions and this change of place
in which the commodity passes over to one side and money to the other
side, occurs simultaneously at an indefinitely large number of points
on the entire surface of bourgeois society. But the first step which
the commodity makes in the sphere of circulation is also its last
step.[72] Whether it leaves its place on account of its attraction
for gold (C―M), or on account of its attraction by gold (M―C), with
one move, with one change of place it falls out of the sphere of
circulation into that of consumption. Circulation is a continuous flow
of commodities, but different commodities all the time, since each
commodity makes but one move. Every commodity enters upon the second
phase of its circulation not as the same commodity, but as another
commodity, gold. Hence the movement of a metamorphosed commodity is the
movement of gold. The same piece of gold or the identical gold coin
which changed places with one commodity in the act C―M, reappears from
the opposite end as the starting point for M―C and thus changes places
for the second time with another commodity. Just as it passed from the
hands of buyer B into those of seller A, it now leaves A’s hands who
has become a buyer and passes into C’s hands. The path described by a
commodity in its transformation into money and its retransformation
from money, i. e., the movement of a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity assumes the aspect of an apparent movement of the same coin
that changes places twice with two different commodities. No matter in
how scattered and haphazard fashion purchases and sales may take place
near each other, there is always in actual circulation a seller for
each buyer and the money which moves into the place of the commodity
sold, before it came into the hands of the buyer, must have already
changed places with another commodity. Sooner or later it again leaves
the hands of the seller, who turns buyer, to pass into the hands of
a new seller and this frequently repeated change of place forms the
interlacing of the metamorphoses of commodities. The same coins are
moving, some more, others less frequently, from one place in the
sphere of circulation to another, always in the direction opposite to
that of the commodities moved, thus describing a longer or shorter
circulation-curve. The different movements of the same coin can follow
each other in point of time only, and on the contrary, the many
scattered purchases and sales which appear as so many separate changes
of place between commodities and money, occur simultaneously separated
only in point of space.

The circulation of commodities C―M―C in its elementary form is
completely described in the transition of money from the hands of the
buyer into those of the seller and from the hands of the latter, as
soon as he has turned buyer, into those of a new seller. This completes
the metamorphosis of the commodity and with it the movement of money
in so far as that movement is the expression of the metamorphosis.
But since new use-values are continually produced in the shape of new
commodities and must thus be constantly thrown anew into circulation,
the process C―M―C is repeatedly renewed by the same commodity owners.
The money which they have spent as buyers gets back into their hands
as soon as they appear again as vendors of commodities. The constant
renewal of the circulation of commodities finds its reflection in the
continual circulation over the entire surface of bourgeois society of
a quantity of money which, passing from hand to hand, describes at the
same time a number of different small cycles starting from numberless
points and returning each to its own starting point, to repeat the same
movement over again.

The change of form on the part of commodities appears as a mere change
of place on the part of money and the continuity of the circulation
movement is all on the side of money, since the commodity always makes
but one step in the direction opposite to money, while the latter makes
in each case the second step for the commodity; the entire movement
seems, therefore, to proceed from money, although in the case of a sale
the commodity draws money out of its place, i. e., it circulates money
as much as it is circulated by the latter in the case of a purchase.
Furthermore, owing to the fact that money always confronts commodities
in its capacity of a means of purchase, and in that capacity moves
commodities only by realizing their price, the entire movement of
circulation appears as a change of place between money and commodities,
the former realizing the prices of the latter either by separate acts
of circulation taking place simultaneously and side by side, or by
successive transactions when the same coin realizes the prices of
different commodities one after another. If we consider, e. g., the
series C―M―C’―M―C”―M―C’”, etc., without regard to the qualitative
aspects which become indistinguishable in the process of circulation,
we witness the same monotonous operation. After realizing the price
of C, M successively realizes those of C’, C”, etc., and commodities
C’, C”, C’”, etc., constantly take the place which money has left.
Money thus appears to keep commodities in circulation by realizing
their prices. In discharging this function of realization of prices,
money is itself constantly circulating, now changing its place, now
describing a curve of circulation, now completing a small circuit where
the starting and returning points coincide. As a medium of circulation,
money is subject to a circulation of its own. The change of form of
the circulating commodities appears, therefore, as a movement of money
which furthers the exchange of commodities, motionless in themselves.
The movement of the circulation process of commodities thus takes on
the form of the movement of gold as a medium of circulation, i. e. of
the _circulation of money_.

Since owners of commodities give the products of their individual labor
the appearance of products of social labor by turning one object,
viz. gold, into the direct expression of universal labor-time and
therefore into money, their own movement by which all of them effect
the interchange of the material products of their labor now appears to
them as the direct movement of that one object, as the circulation of
gold. The social movement itself appears to the owners of commodities
partly as an outward necessity and partly as a mere formal intermediary
process which enables every individual who puts any use-value into
circulation to get other use-values out of it of an equal value. The
use-value of commodities comes into play with their disappearance from
the sphere or circulation, while the use-value of money as a medium of
circulation is in its very circulation. The movement of a commodity
in the sphere of circulation is of a transitory kind, while ceaseless
motion in that sphere constitutes the function of money. Through this
special function which it performs within the sphere of circulation
money acquires a new capacity, which we have to consider now more
closely.

In the first place, we see that the circulation of money forms an
endlessly split up movement, since it reflects the splitting up of the
process of circulation into an infinitely large number of purchases
and sales and the independent separation of the mutually supplementary
phases of metamorphoses of commodities. In the small cycles described
by money, where the starting and returning points coincide, we do find
a return movement, i. e., an actual circular movement, but the fact
that there are as many starting points as there are commodities and
that the number of these cycles is infinitely large puts them beyond
all control, measurement, or computation. The time between the start
and the return of a commodity is just as indefinite. Moreover, it is
immaterial whether or not such a circuit has been actually described in
a given case. No economic fact is more generally known than that one
can spend money with one hand without getting it back with the other.
Money proceeds from an endless number of points and returns to as many
different points, but the coincidence of the starting and returning
points is a matter of chance, because in the movement C―M―C the turning
of the buyer again into a seller is not a necessary condition. Still
less does the circulation of money resemble a movement radiating
from a common centre to all points of the periphery and back from
the peripheral points to the centre. The so-called cycle described
by money, as it is pictured, amounts simply to this, that at all
points we observe its appearance and disappearance, its never ceasing
transition from place to place. In a higher, more involved form of
money circulation, e. g. bank-note circulation, we shall find that
the conditions of emission of money include those for its return. But
in the simple money circulation it is a matter of chance for the same
buyer to become again a seller. Where we really see constant cycle
motions taking place, they are only reflections of deeper forces in
the sphere of production, e. g., the manufacturer draws money from his
banker on Friday, pays it out to his working-men on Saturday, the men
immediately pay out the greater part of it to the storekeepers, etc.,
and the latter turn it in on Monday back to the banker.

We have seen that money realizes simultaneously a certain number of
prices in the variegated purchases and sales which take place side by
side at the same time. On the other hand, in so far as its movement
represents the movement of the combined metamorphoses of commodities
and the interlacing of these metamorphoses, the same coin realizes
the prices of different commodities and thus makes a larger or
smaller number of moves. If we take the circulation of a country for
a given length of time, say a day, the quantity of gold required for
the realization of prices and, consequently, for the circulation of
commodities, will be determined by two conditions: first, the sum
total of the prices; second, the average number of moves made by one
coin. This number of moves or the rapidity of circulation of money is
in its turn determined by or expresses the average rapidity with which
commodities go through the different phases of their metamorphoses, the
rapidity with which these metamorphoses succeed one another, and with
which those commodities that have gone through their metamorphoses are
replaced by new commodities in the process of circulation. We have seen
that in the process of the determination of prices the exchange value
of all commodities is ideally converted into a certain quantity of gold
of the same value and that the same amount of value is present in a
double form in either of the isolated acts of circulation M―C and C―M,
first embodied in the commodity, and second, in gold; yet gold enjoys
the capacity of a medium of circulation not by virtue of its isolated
relation to separate commodities in a state of rest, but owing to its
active presence in the dynamic world of commodities, viz., its function
of expressing the change of form of commodities by its change of place
and expressing the rapidity of their change of form by the rapidity of
its change of place. The extent to which it is present in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., the actual quantity of gold in circulation, is
thus determined by the extent to which it is discharging its function
throughout the entire process.

The circulation of money implies the circulation of commodities; money
circulates commodities which have prices, i. e., which are beforehand
ideally equated to certain quantities of gold. In the determination
of the prices of commodities, the value of the quantity of gold
which serves as a unit of measure, or the value of gold, is assumed
to be given. Under that assumption the quantity of gold necessary
for circulation is determined first of all by the sum total of the
prices of commodities that are to be realized. But this sum is itself
determined: 1. By the level of prices, the relatively high or low
exchange value of commodities estimated in gold; and 2. By the mass
of commodities circulating at fixed prices, i. e. by the number of
purchases and sales at given prices.[73] If one quarter of wheat is
worth 60 shillings, then twice as much gold is required to circulate it
or to realize its price as would be the case if it were worth only 30
shillings. To circulate 500 quarters of wheat at 60 shillings, twice
as much gold is necessary as for the circulation of 250 quarters at
the same price. Finally, to circulate 10 quarters at 100 shillings
only half as much money is necessary as when circulating 40 quarters
at 50 shillings. It follows that the quantity of gold required for
circulation may fall in spite of a rise in price, if the mass of
commodities in circulation declines in a greater ratio than the
rise of the combined sum of prices; and, inversely, the quantity of
the circulating medium may rise in spite of a decline of the mass
of commodities in circulation, if the sum total of prices rises in
a greater ratio. Thorough and minute English investigations have
demonstrated e. g. that in the early stages of a dearth of grain in
England the quantity of money in circulation increases, because the
total price of the diminished supply of grain is greater than the
former total price of a larger supply of grain, while the circulation
of the other commodities continues undisturbed for some time at their
old prices. At a later stage of the dearth of grain, there is a decline
in the quantity of circulating money, either because less goods are
sold at old prices besides grain, or the same quantity of those goods
is sold at lower prices.

But, as we have seen, the quantity of money in circulation is
determined not only by the sum total of prices of commodities that are
to be realized, but also by the rapidity with which money circulates
or with which it completes this work of realization. If the same
sovereign makes ten purchases a day, each of a commodity having a
price of one sovereign, and thus changes hands ten times, it does as
much work as would be accomplished by ten sovereigns each performing
but a single act of circulation a day.[74] Consequently, rapidity of
gold circulation can make up for its quantity, or the presence of gold
in the sphere of circulation is determined not only by its presence
as an equivalent of a commodity side by side with it, but also by
its participation in the movement of metamorphoses of commodities.
The rapidity of the circulation of money, however, can serve as a
substitute for its quantity only to a limited extent, since at any
given moment an endless number of isolated purchases and sales takes
places in different localities.

If the total price of the commodities in circulation rises, but in
a smaller ratio than the increase in the rapidity of circulation of
money, the volume of the circulating medium will diminish. If on the
contrary the rapidity of circulation decreases in a greater ratio
than the total price of the commodities in circulation, the volume
of currency will increase. An increasing volume of currency combined
with a general fall of prices or a diminishing volume of currency in
connection with a general rise of prices is one of the best known
phenomena in the history of prices. But the consideration of the
causes which bring about a simultaneous rise in the level of prices
and a still greater rise in the rate of velocity of circulation of
money, or the opposite phenomenon, falls outside of the sphere of
simple circulation. By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that
in periods of prevailing credit, the rapidity of circulation of
money grows faster than the prices of commodities, while in times
of declining credit the prices of commodities fall slower than the
rapidity of circulation. The shallow and artificial character of the
simple circulation of money is manifested in the fact that all the
elements which have a determining influence on the volume of currency,
such as the volume of commodities in circulation, prices, the rise or
fall of prices, the number of simultaneous purchases and sales, the
rapidity of the circulation of money,―depend on the metamorphic process
which takes place in the world of commodities, and that again depends
on the general character of the methods of production, the size of
population, the relation between city and country, the development of
the means of transportation, the greater or less division of labor,
credit, etc.; in short, on circumstances all of which lie _outside_ of
the sphere of simple circulation of money and are only reflected in it.

The rapidity of circulation being given, the volume of currency is
simply determined by the prices of commodities. Hence, prices are not
high or low, because there is more or less money in circulation, but
on the contrary, there is more or less money in circulation, because
prices are high or low. This is one of the most important laws, whose
demonstration in detail by means of the history of prices constitutes
perhaps the only merit of the post-Ricardian English Political Economy.
If experience shows, that the level of metallic circulation or the mass
of gold and silver in circulation in a given country is subject to
temporary ebbs and tides and very violent ones at times,[75] but on
the whole remains stationary for long periods, the deviations forming
but small oscillations about the average level, this is explained
by the antagonistic nature of the circumstances which determine the
quantity of money in circulation. Their simultaneous modifications
neutralize their effects and leave everything where it was before.

The law, that with a given rapidity of circulation of money and a given
total sum of prices of commodities the quantity of the circulating
medium is determined, may also be expressed as follows. If the exchange
values of commodities and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses
are given, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value. If, therefore, the value of gold, i. e. the labor-time necessary
for its production, should rise or fall, the prices of commodities will
rise or fall in inverse ratio, and corresponding to that rise or fall
of prices, the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, a larger or
smaller quantity of gold would be required to keep the same volume of
commodities in circulation. The same change would occur, if the old
standard of value were superseded by a more or less valuable metal.
Thus, Holland required from fourteen to fifteen times as much silver as
it had previously required gold, in order to circulate the same volume
of commodities, when out of tender regard for the government creditors
and out of fear of the effects of the discoveries in California and
Australia it substituted silver for gold money.

From the fact that the quantity of gold in circulation depends on the
variable sum total of prices of commodities and the varying rapidity
of circulation, it follows that the volume of the circulating medium
must be capable of contraction and expansion; in short, that according
to the requirements of circulation, gold must now enter, now leave the
sphere of circulation in its capacity of a medium of circulation. How
the circulation process itself realizes these conditions, we shall see
later on.


C. COIN AND SYMBOLS OF VALUE.

In its capacity of a medium of circulation, gold acquires a shape
of its own, it becomes _coin_. In order to prevent any technical
difficulties in the way of its circulation, it is coined according to
the standard of the money of account. Gold pieces whose imprints and
legends show that they contain certain weights of gold corresponding
to the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are coins. The
establishment of a mint-price, as well as the technical work of
coining, are the business of the state. Both as money of account and
as coin, money acquires a _local and political character_; it speaks
different languages and wears different national uniforms. The sphere
in which money circulates as coin, is distinguished as an _internal_
sphere of circulation which is separated from the _universal_ sphere of
circulation in the commodity world by national boundaries.

Yet, the only difference between gold bullion and gold coin is that
between coin denomination and weight denomination. What seems to be a
difference in name in the latter case appears as a difference in shape
in the former. Gold coin can be thrown into the melting-pot and thus be
converted again into gold _sans phrase_, just as, on the contrary, gold
bars only have to be sent to the mint to receive the shape of coins.
The conversion and reconversion from one form into another appears to
be a purely technical matter.

For 100 pounds or 1200 ounces troy of 22 carat gold one can get
£4,672-1/2 or gold sovereigns at the English mint; if these sovereigns
be put on one side of the weighing scale and one hundred pounds of
gold bullion on the other, the two will balance each other, which
proves that the sovereign is nothing but a piece of gold of certain
weight bearing this name in English coinage and having a shape and
stamp of its own. The 4,672-1/2 sovereigns are put into circulation
at different points, and once in its grasp they make a certain number
of moves per day, some sovereigns more, others less. If the average
number of moves per day of each ounce be ten, the 1200 ounces of gold
would realize 12,000 ounces or 46,725 sovereigns as the total price
of commodities. You may turn and toss an ounce of gold in any way you
like, and it will never weigh ten ounces. But here in the process of
circulation one ounce practically does weigh ten ounces. The work
performed by a coin in the sphere of circulation is equivalent to the
quantity of gold it contains multiplied by the number of its moves.
Besides the actual importance which a coin possesses by virtue of its
being an individual piece of gold of a definite weight, it acquires
an ideal significance due to its function. But whether the sovereign
circulates once or ten times, in each particular purchase or sale
it acts only as one sovereign. It is like a general who by timely
appearance at ten different points on the battle field does the work
of ten generals, but still remains the same identical general at each
point. The idealization of the means of circulation which is due to the
supplanting of quantity by rapidity in money circulation, affects only
the function of the coin within the sphere of circulation, but not the
nature of the individual coin.

The circulation of money is a movement through the outside world, and
the sovereign, though it _non olet_, keeps rather mixed company. In the
course of its friction against all kinds of hands, pouches, pockets,
purses, money-belts, bags, chests and strong-boxes, the coin rubs off,
loses one gold atom here and another one there and thus, as it wears
off in its wanderings over the world, it loses more and more of its
intrinsic substance. By being used it gets used up. Let us take up a
sovereign at the moment when its natural, inborn character has been
slightly affected. A baker, says Dodd,[76] who receives from the bank
to-day a brand new sovereign and pays it tomorrow to the miller,
does not pay the same veritable sovereign; the latter has become
lighter than it was at the time he received it. It is clear, says an
anonymous writer,[77] that in the very nature of things, coins must
depreciate one by one as a result of ordinary and unavoidable friction.
It is a physical impossibility to entirely exclude light coins from
circulation at any time, even for one day. Jacob estimates that of
the 380 million pounds sterling which were in existence in Europe in
1809, nineteen million pounds sterling entirely disappeared by 1829,
i. e., within a period of twenty years.[78] Thus, while a commodity
at its first step into the sphere of circulation, falls out of it, a
coin, after a couple of steps within that sphere represents more metal
than it actually contains. The longer a coin remains in circulation,
the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, or the greater its
rapidity of circulation within the same period of time, the greater
the discrepancy between its form as coin and its actual gold or silver
substance. What remains is _magni nominis umbra_. The body of the coin
becomes but a shadow. If at first it became heavier through the process
of circulation, it now becomes lighter on account of it, but continues
to represent the original quantity of gold in each single purchase or
sale. The sovereign, as a fictitious sovereign, as fictitious gold,
continues to perform the function of a legitimate coin. While other
beings lose their idealism in contact with the outer world, the coin is
idealized by practice, being gradually transformed into a mere phantom
of its golden or silver body. This second idealization of metal money
springing from the very process of circulation, or from the discrepancy
between its nominal weight and its real weight is exploited in all
kinds of coin counterfeiting practiced partly by governments, partly by
private adventurers. The entire history of coinage from the beginning
of the middle ages until late in the eighteenth century is nothing
but a history of these twofold and antagonistic adulterations, and
Custodi’s voluminous collection of writings of Italian economists turns
mostly about this point.

But the fictitious importance of gold due to its function, comes
in conflict with its real substance. One gold coin has lost more,
another, less of its metal substance in the course of circulation,
and one of them is, as a matter of fact, worth more now than the
other. But since in the discharge of their function of coins they
are taken at the same value, the sovereign weighing a quarter of an
ounce passing for no more than the sovereign which only stands for a
quarter of an ounce, the full-weight sovereigns are subjected in the
hands of unscrupulous owners to surgical operations which produce
artificially what the circulation process has caused in a natural way
to their more light-weighted brothers. They are clipped and reduced
and the superfluous gold fat lands in the melting pot. If 4,672-1/2
gold sovereigns when put on one side of the weighing scale weigh on an
average only 800 ounces instead of 1200, they will buy when brought
to the gold market only 800 ounces of gold; that is, the market price
of gold would rise above its mint price. Every coin, even if of full
weight would pass in its mint form for less than in bullion form. The
full weight sovereigns would be reconverted into bullion, a form in
which a greater quantity of gold is always worth more than a smaller
quantity. As soon as this decline of metallic weight would affect a
sufficiently large number of sovereigns to bring about a permanent
rise of the market price of gold above its mint price, the reckoning
names of the coins, though remaining the same, would begin to denote a
smaller quantity of gold. That is to say, the standard of money would
change and gold would be coined in the future according to this new
standard. By virtue of its idealization as a medium of circulation,
gold would react upon and change the legally determined ratios under
which it acted as the standard of price. The same revolution would
be repeated after a certain length of time and thus gold would be
subject to constant change both as a standard of price and as a
medium of circulation, a change under one of these forms leading to a
change under the other and vice versa. This explains the phenomenon
mentioned above, namely that in the history of all modern nations
the same money-name stands for a constantly diminishing quantity of
metal. The contradiction between gold as coin and gold as standard of
price becomes also one between gold as coin and gold as the universal
equivalent; in the latter capacity it circulates not only within the
limits of national boundaries, but in the world market. As a measure of
value gold was always of full weight, because it served only as ideal
gold. In its capacity of equivalent in the isolated transaction C―M it
passes at once from a state of motion to a state of rest; but in its
capacity of coin its natural substance comes in constant conflict with
its function. The transformation of the gold sovereign into fictitious
gold can not be wholly avoided, but legislation seeks to prevent its
unlimited circulation as coin by prescribing its withdrawal from
circulation as soon as its shortage of metallic substance reaches a
certain degree. According to the English law, e. g., a sovereign which
lacks more than 0.747 grains of its weight ceases to be legal tender.
The Bank of England which weighed forty-eight million gold sovereigns
in the short period between 1844 and 1848, possesses in Mr. Cotton’s
gold weighing scale a machine which not only detects a difference of
1-100 part of a grain between two sovereigns, but like a sensible
being, immediately throws out the light-weight coin on a board where
it lands under another machine which cuts it up with oriental cruelty.

That being the case, gold coins could not circulate at all were not
their circulation confined to definite spheres in which they do not
wear off so rapidly. In so far as a gold coin weighing only one-fifth
of an ounce passes in circulation for a quarter of an ounce of gold,
it is practically merely a sign or a symbol for one-twentieth of an
ounce of gold, and in that way all gold coins are transformed by the
very process of circulation into more or less of a mere sign or symbol
of their substance. But no thing can be its own symbol. Painted grapes
are no symbol of real grapes, they are imaginary grapes. Still less can
a light-weight sovereign be a symbol of a full-weighted one, just as
a lean horse can not serve as a symbol of a fat one. Since gold thus
becomes a symbol of its own self, but at the same time can not serve in
that capacity, it receives a symbolical, silver or copper substitute in
those spheres of circulation in which it is most subject to wear and
tear, namely where purchases and sales are constantly taking place on
the smallest scale. In these spheres, even if not the same identical
coins, still a certain part of the entire supply of gold money would
constantly circulate as coin. To that extent gold is substituted by
silver or copper tokens. Thus, while only a specific commodity can
perform in a given country the function of a measure of value and
therefore of money, different commodities can serve as coin side by
side with gold. These subsidiary mediums of circulation, such as silver
or copper coins, represent definite fractions of a gold coin within
the sphere of circulation. Their own silver or copper weight is,
therefore, not determined by the proportions of the respective values
of silver and copper to that of gold, but is arbitrarily fixed by law.
They may be issued only in such quantities in which the diminutive
fractions of gold coin which they represent would constantly circulate
either for purposes of change for gold coins of higher denominations,
or for realizing equally small prices of commodities. In retail trade
silver and copper tokens belong to distinct spheres of circulation. In
the nature of things, the rapidity of their circulation is in inverse
ratio to the price which they realize in each separate purchase or
sale, or to the size of the fraction of gold coin which they represent.
If we consider how immense the volume of the daily retail trade in a
country like England is, we will understand from the comparatively
insignificant proportions of its combined volume how rapid and steady
the circulation of the subsidiary coin must be. From a parliamentary
report of recent date we see, e. g., that in 1857 the English mint
coined £4,859,000 worth of gold, £733,000 of silver nominal value which
contained metal actually worth £363,000. The total amount of gold
coined in the ten years ending December 31, 1857, was £55,239,000, and
of silver only £2,434,000. The supply of copper coin in 1857 amounted
only to £6,720 nominal value containing £3,492 worth of copper; of this
£3,136 was in pennies, £2,464 in half-pennies, and £1,120 in farthings.
The total value of copper coined in the ten years was £141,477 nominal,
the metallic value being £73,503. Just as gold coin is prevented from
permanently retaining its function of coin by the legal provision of
the loss of weight which demonetizes it, so are the silver and copper
tokens prevented from passing from their spheres of circulation into
that of gold coin and acquiring the character of money by the provision
of the maximum amount for which they are legal tender. In England e.
g. copper is legal tender only to the amount of six pence and silver
up to forty shillings. If silver and copper tokens were to be issued
in greater quantities than the requirements of their spheres of
circulation call for, prices of commodities would not rise as a result,
but the accumulation of these tokens in the hands of retail dealers
would reach such an extent that they would be finally compelled to sell
them as metal. Thus in 1798 English copper coins, issued by private
individuals, accumulated in the hands of small traders to the amount
of £20,350 which they tried in vain to put again in circulation, being
finally compelled to throw them as metal on the copper market.[79]

The silver and copper tokens which represent gold coin in certain
spheres of circulation in the interior of the country, contain a
definite quantity of silver and copper prescribed by law, but after
they get into circulation, they wear off like gold coins and become
even more rapidly mere phantoms, according to the rapidity and
steadiness of their circulation. To draw again a line of demonetization
beyond which silver and copper tokens would lose their character of
coins, they would have to be replaced in turn within certain spheres
of their own circulation by some other symbolic money, say iron and
lead, and such representation of one kind of symbolic money by another
kind would form an endless process. In all countries with a well
developed circulation the very requirements of money circulation make
it necessary that the character of silver and copper tokens as money be
made independent of any loss of weight in those coins. Thus, as it was
in the nature of things, it appears that they serve as symbols of gold
coin not because they are symbols made of silver or copper, not because
they have certain value, but only in so far as they have no value.

Relatively worthless things, such as _paper_, can consequently perform
the function of symbols of gold money. That subsidiary currency
consists of metal tokens, such as silver, copper, etc., is mainly due
to the fact that in most countries the less valuable metals such as
silver in England, copper in ancient Rome, Sweden, Scotland, etc.,
had circulated as money before they were degraded by the process of
circulation to the rank of small change and replaced by a more precious
metal. Besides, it is natural that the money symbol which grows
directly out of metallic circulation, should itself be a metal. Just
as that portion of gold which would always have to circulate as small
change, is replaced by metal tokens; so can the other portion of gold
which is constantly absorbed as coin by circulation in the interior of
the country and, therefore, must continually circulate, be replaced
with worthless tokens. The level below which the mass of circulating
coin never sinks is determined in each country by experience. Thus,
the originally imperceptible difference between the nominal weight and
the metallic weight of a metal coin can grow apace until it reaches the
point of absolute separation. The mint name of money parts company with
its substance and exists outside of it in worthless slips of paper.
Just as the exchange value of commodities is crystallized by their
process of exchange into gold money, so is gold money sublimated in
its currency into its own symbol first in the form of worn coin, then
in the form of subsidiary metal currency, and finally in the form of a
worthless token, paper, mere _sign of value_.

Gold coin has produced its substitutes, first metallic and then paper,
only because in spite of its loss of metallic weight it continued to
perform the function of coin. It did not circulate because of its wear
and tear; on the contrary, it wore out to a symbol because it continued
to circulate. Only in so far as gold money becomes simply a token of
its own value in the process of circulation, can mere tokens of value
take its place.

In so far as the movement C―M―C represents a dynamic unity of two
processes C―M and M―C which pass directly one into the other, or in
so far as a commodity passes through the complete process of its
metamorphosis, it express its exchange value in price and in money
only to discard that form at once and to become again a commodity or,
rather, a use-value. That is to say, it develops _only an apparent
assertion of the independence_ of its exchange value. On the other
hand, we have seen that gold, in so far as it performs the function
of coin or in so far as it continually circulates, actually forms
only a connecting link between the metamorphoses of commodities and
constitutes _but their transitory money form_; furthermore, that it
realizes the price of one set of commodities only in order to realize
that of another, but in no case does it constitute a stable form of
exchange value or appear itself as a commodity in a state of rest. The
reality which the exchange value of commodities acquires in the process
and which is represented by gold in its circulation, is the reality of
an electric spark. Although real gold, it plays the part of fictitious
gold, and can, therefore, be replaced in this function by a token of
itself.

The token of value, say paper, which plays the part of coin, is the
token of a quantity of gold expressed in its currency name, i. e., it
is a gold token. Just as a certain quantity of gold does not in itself
express a value ratio, so is that true of the token which takes its
place. In so far as a certain quantity of gold, as embodied labor-time,
has a value of a certain magnitude, the gold token represents value.
But the magnitude of the value which it represents depends all the
time on the value of the quantity of gold for which it stands. As
regards commodities the token of value expresses _the reality of their
price_, it is _signum pretii_ and sign of their value only because
their value is expressed in their price. In the process C―M―C, in so
far as it represents the dynamic unity or direct alternation of the
two metamorphoses―and that is the aspect it assumes in the sphere of
circulation in which the token of value discharges its function―the
exchange value of commodities acquires in price only an ideal
expression and in money only an imaginary symbolic existence. Exchange
value thus acquires _only_ an imaginary though material expression,
but it has no real existence except in the commodities themselves, in
so far as a certain quantity of labor-time is embodied in them. It
_appears_, therefore, that the token of value represents _directly_
the value of commodities, by figuring not as a token of gold but as
a token of the value which exists in the commodity alone and is only
expressed in price. But it is a false appearance. The token of value is
directly only _a token of price_, i. e., a _token of gold_, and only
indirectly a token of value of a commodity. Unlike Peter Shlemihl, gold
has not sold its shadow, but buys with its shadow. The token of value
operates only in so far as it represents the price of one commodity
as against that of another within the sphere of circulation, or in so
far as it _represents gold_ to every owner of commodities. A certain
comparatively worthless object such as a piece of leather, a slip of
paper, etc., becomes by force of custom a token of money material, but
maintains its existence in that capacity only so long as its character
as a symbol of money is guaranteed by the general acquiescence of
the owners of commodities, i. e., so long as it enjoys a legally
established conventional existence and compulsory circulation. Paper
money issued by the state and circulating as legal tender is the
perfected form of the token of value, and the only form of paper money,
which has its immediate origin in metallic circulation or even in the
simple circulation of commodities. _Credit money_ belongs to a higher
sphere of the social process of production and is governed by entirely
different laws. Symbolic paper money does not in fact, differ in the
least from subsidiary metal coin, except that it reaches wider spheres
of circulation. We have seen that the mere technical development of the
standard of price or of the mint price and later the shaping of gold
bullion into coin have called forth the interference of the state; this
circumstance brought about a visible separation of national circulation
from the world circulation of commodities: this separation is completed
by the evolution of coin into a token of value. As a mere medium of
circulation money can assume an independent existence only within the
sphere of national circulation.[80]

Our presentation has shown that the coin form of gold as a token of
value differentiated from the gold substance itself, has its direct
origin in the process of circulation and not in any agreement or state
interference. Russia offers a striking example of the natural origin of
the token of value. At the time when hides and furs played there the
part of money, the conflict between the perishable and bulky nature of
the material and its function as a medium of circulation resulted in
the custom of replacing it by small pieces of stamped leather which
thus became a kind of draft payable in hides and furs. Later on they
became under the name of copecs mere tokens for fractions of the silver
rouble and remained in use in some parts until 1700, when Peter the
Great ordered their withdrawal in exchange for small copper coins
issued by the state. Ancient writers who could observe the phenomena
of exclusively metallic circulation, already took the view of coin
as a symbol or token of value. That is true both of _Plato_[81] and
_Aristotle_.[82] In countries where credit is not developed, as e. g.
in China, legal tender paper money is found at an early date[83]. Early
advocates of paper money expressly point out the fact that metallic
coin is transformed into a token of value in the very process of
circulation. So Benjamin Franklin[84] and Bishop Berkeley.[85]

How many reams of paper cut up into bills can circulate as money? Put
in that way, the question would be absurd. The worthless tokens are
signs of value only in so far as they represent gold within the sphere
of circulation and they represent it only to the extent to which it
would itself be absorbed as coin by the process of circulation; this
quantity is determined by its own value, the exchange values of the
commodities and the rapidity of their metamorphoses being given. Bills
of a denomination of £5 could circulate in a quantity five times
less than those of £1 denomination, and if all payments were made in
shilling bills, then twenty times as many shilling bills would have to
be in circulation as are one pound bills. If the gold currency were
represented by bills of different denominations, e. g. five pound,
one pound and ten shilling bills, then the quantity of these different
tokens of value would be determined not only by the quantity of gold
necessary for circulation as a whole, but also by that required in the
sphere of circulation of each kind of bills. If fourteen million pounds
sterling (this is the provision of the English Bank Law, not for the
entire currency but only for credit money) were the level below which
the circulation of a country never sank, then fourteen million paper
bills, each a token of value of one pound, could circulate. If the
value of gold fell or rose because the labor-time necessary for its
production had fallen or risen, then, the exchange value of the same
volume of commodities remaining the same, the number of one pound bills
in circulation would rise or fall in inverse ratio to the change in the
value of gold. If gold were replaced by silver as a measure of value,
the ratio of the respective values of silver and gold being 1:15, and
if each bill were to represent now the same quantity of silver as it
represented gold before, then there would be 210 million one pound
bills in circulation instead of the previous fourteen million. The
number of paper bills is thus determined by the quantity of gold money
which they represent in circulation, and since they are tokens of value
only in so far as they represent it, their value is simply determined
by their _quantity_. Thus, while the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, the value of the paper
bills in circulation, on the contrary, depends exclusively on their own
quantity.

The interference of the state which issues paper money as legal
tender―and we are treating of paper money of that kind only―seems to
do away with the economic law. The state which in its mint price gave
a certain name to a piece of gold of certain weight, and in the act of
coinage only impressed its stamp on gold, seems now to turn paper into
gold by the magic of its stamp. Since paper bills are legal tender,
no one can prevent the state from forcing as large a quantity of them
as it desires into circulation and from impressing upon it any coin
denomination, such as £1, £5, £20. The bills which have once gotten
into circulation can not be removed, since on the one hand their course
is hemmed in by the frontier posts of the country and on the other
they lose all value, use-value, as well as exchange-value, outside
of circulation. Take away from them their function and they become
worthless rags of paper. Yet this power of the state is a mere fiction.
It may throw into circulation any desired quantity of paper bills of
whatever denomination, but with this mechanical act its control ceases.
Once in the grip of circulation and the token of value or paper money
becomes subject to its intrinsic laws.

If fourteen million pounds sterling were the quantity of gold
required for the circulation of commodities and if the state were to
put into circulation two hundred and ten million bills each of the
denomination of £1, then these two hundred and ten millions would
become the representatives of gold to the amount of fourteen million
pounds sterling. It would be the same as if the state were to make
the one pound bills represent a fifteen times less valuable metal or
a fifteen times smaller weight of gold. Nothing would be changed but
the nomenclature of the standard of price, which by its very nature is
conventional, no matter whether such change takes place as a direct
result of a change of the mint standard or indirectly owing to an
increase of paper bills to an extent required by a new lower standard.
Since the name £ would stand now for a fifteen times smaller quantity
of gold, the prices of all commodities would increase fifteen times and
two hundred and ten million one pound bills would now be actually as
necessary as fourteen million had been before. To the same extent to
which the combined quantity of tokens of value would increase now, the
quantity of gold which each of them represents would decrease. The rise
of prices would constitute but a reaction on the part of the process of
circulation which forcibly equates the tokens of value to the quantity
of gold which they are supposed to replace.

In the history of the debasement of money in England and France by
their governments, we find repeatedly that prices had not risen in the
same proportion in which the silver coinage had been debased. That was
simply due to the fact that the proportion in which the currency was
increased did not correspond to the proportion in which it had been
debased; that is to say, because an inadequate quantity of coins of
the poorer metallic composition was issued, if the exchange values
of commodities were to be estimated in the future in the new coin as
a measure of value and be realized in coins corresponding to this
smaller unit of measure. This solves the difficulty left unsettled in
the controversy between Locke and Lowndes. The ratio which a token
of value, whether made of paper or of debased gold or silver, bears
to certain weights of gold or silver estimated according to the mint
price, depends not on its own composition but on the quantity in which
it is found in circulation. The difficulty in understanding this is
due to the fact that money in its two functions of a measure of value
and a medium of circulation is subject to two not only opposite but
apparently contradictory laws corresponding to the difference in the
two functions. In the discharge of its function of a measure of value
where money serves merely as money of account and gold only as ideal
gold, everything depends on the natural substance of money. Estimated
in silver or expressed in silver prices exchange values are naturally
estimated quite differently than when measured in gold or as gold
prices. On the contrary, in its function of a medium of circulation,
where gold is not only imagined but is actually present side by side
with other commodities, its substance is immaterial and everything
depends on its quantity. For the unit of measure the determining factor
is whether it consists of a pound of gold, silver or copper; while in
the case of coin, no matter what its own composition is, it will become
the embodiment of each of these units of measure in accordance with its
quantity. But it goes against common sense that in the case of mere
imaginary money everything should depend on its material substance,
while in that of the palpably present coin all should be determined by
an ideal ratio of numbers.

The rise or fall of prices of commodities following a rise or fall
of the quantity of paper notes―the latter only where paper currency
constitutes the exclusive medium of circulation―is thus nothing but
an assertion through the process of circulation of a law mechanically
violated from without; namely, that the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, and the quantity of tokens
of value in circulation is determined by the quantity of gold coin
which it represents. For that reason any desired number of paper notes
will be absorbed and equally digested by the process of circulation,
because the token of value, no matter with what gold title it may enter
circulation, will be compressed within the latter to a token of that
quantity of gold which could actually circulate in its place.

In the case of the circulation of tokens of value all laws pertaining
to the circulation of real money appear to be reversed and standing
on their heads. While gold circulates because it has value, paper has
value because it circulates. While with a given exchange value of
commodities, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value, the value of paper depends on its own quantity in circulation.
While the quantity of gold in circulation rises or falls with the
rise or fall of prices of commodities, the prices of commodities
seem to rise or fall with the change in the quantity of paper in
circulation. While the circulation of commodities can absorb only a
definite quantity of gold coin and as a result of that the alternating
contraction and expansion of the currency appears as a necessary law,
paper money seems to enter circulation in any desired amount. While
the state is guilty of debasing gold and silver coin and of disturbing
their function of a medium of circulation, if it turns out a coin,
only 1-100 of a grain below its nominal weight; it performs a perfectly
proper operation by issuing absolutely worthless paper notes which
contain nothing of the metal except its mint denomination. While gold
coin apparently represents the value of commodities only in so far as
that value is itself estimated in gold or is expressed in price, the
token of value seems to represent directly the value of commodities.
It is, therefore, clear why students who examined one-sidedly the
phenomena of circulation of money by confining their observations to
the circulation of legal tender paper money, should have failed to
grasp the intrinsic laws governing the circulation of money. As a
matter of fact, these laws appear not only reversed but extinct in the
circulation of tokens of value, since paper currency, if issued in
the right quantity, goes through certain movements which are not in
its nature as a token of value, while its proper movement instead of
growing directly out of the metamorphosis of commodities, springs from
the violation of its proper proportion to gold.


3. MONEY.

Money as distinguished from coin, the result of the circulation process
C―M―C, forms the starting point of the circulation process M―C―M, i.
e. the exchange of money for commodity in order to exchange commodity
for money. In the form C―M―C, commodity forms the starting and final
points of the movement; in the form M―C―M, money plays that part. In
the former case money is the medium of exchange of commodities, in
the latter the commodity helps money to become money. Money which
appears merely as a means of circulation in the first form becomes
an end in the second form; while commodity which appeared first as
the end, now becomes but a means. Since money is itself the result of
circulation C―M―C, the result of circulation appears at the same time
as its starting point in the form M―C―M. While in the case of C―M―C the
interchange of matter constituted the real import of the process, the
form of the commodity resulting from this first process constitutes the
import of the second process M―C―M.

In the form C―M―C the two extreme members are commodities of the same
value, but qualitatively different use-values. Their mutual exchange
C―C constitutes actual interchange of matter. In the form M―C―M the
two extremes are gold and at the same time gold of equal value. To
exchange gold for a commodity in order to exchange the commodity for
gold, or if we consider the final result M―M, to exchange gold for
gold, seems absurd. But if we translate the formula M―C―M into the
expression: _to buy_ in order _to sell_, which means nothing but to
exchange gold for gold through an intervening movement, we recognize
at once the prevailing form of capitalist production. In actual
practice, however, people do not buy in order to sell, but they buy
cheap in order to sell dear. Money is exchanged for a commodity in
order to exchange the same commodity for a larger amount of money, so
that the extremes M, M are, if not qualitatively, then quantitatively
different. Such a quantitative difference presupposes the _exchange of
non-equivalents_, yet commodity and money as such are only opposite
forms of the same commodity, i. e. they are different forms of the same
magnitude of value. The circuit M―C―M thus conceals under the forms
of money and commodity more highly developed relations of production,
and is but a reflection within the sphere of simple circulation of a
movement of a more advanced character. Money, as distinguished from the
medium of circulation, must therefore be developed from the direct form
of circulation of commodities, C―M―C.

Gold, i. e., the specific commodity which serves as a measure of
value and a medium of circulation, becomes money without any further
assistance on the part of society. In England, where silver is neither
the measure of value nor the prevailing medium of circulation, it
does not become money, just as gold in Holland, as soon as it had been
dethroned as a measure of value, ceased to be money. A commodity thus
becomes money only in its combined capacity of a measure of value
and medium of circulation; or, the unity of the measure of value and
medium of circulation is money. As such a unity, however, gold has a
separate existence independent of its existence in the two functions.
As a measure of value it is only ideal money and ideal gold; as a mere
medium of circulation it is symbolic money and symbolic gold; but in
its plain metallic bodily form gold is money or money is real gold.

Let us now consider for a moment the commodity gold when it is in a
state of rest, and plays the part of money in its relation to other
commodities. All commodities represent in their prices a certain
quantity of gold, that is to say, they are merely imaginary gold or
imaginary money, representatives of gold, just as, on the other hand,
money in the form of a token of value appeared as a mere representative
of prices of commodities.[86] Since all commodities are thus but
imaginary money, money is the only real commodity. Contrary to
commodities, which only represent the independently existing exchange
value, i. e., universal social labor, or abstract wealth, gold is the
_material form of abstract wealth_. Through its use-value, every
commodity, by its relation to some particular want, expresses only one
aspect of material wealth, but one side of wealth. Money, however,
satisfies every want since it can be directly converted into the object
of any want. Its own use-value is realized in the endless series of
use-values which form its equivalents. In its virgin metallic state
it holds locked up all the material wealth which lies unfolded in the
world of commodities. Thus, while commodities represent in their prices
the universal equivalent or abstract wealth, viz., gold, the latter
represents in its use-value the use-values of all commodities. Gold
is, therefore, _the bodily representative of material wealth_. It is
the “precis de toutes les choses” (Boisguillebert), the compendium
of the wealth of society. At one and the same time, it is the direct
incarnation of universal labor in its form, and the aggregate
of all concrete labor in its substance. It is universal wealth
individualized.[87] As a medium of circulation it underwent all kinds
of injury, was clipped, and even reduced to the condition of a mere
symbolic paper rag. As money it is restored to its golden glory.[88]
From a serve it becomes a lord. From a mere understrapper it rises to
the position of Lord of commodities.[89]


a. HOARDING.

Gold separates itself as money from the process of circulation whenever
a commodity interrupts the process of its metamorphosis and remains
in its form of a gold chrysalis. This occurs every time a sale is not
immediately followed by purchase. The independent isolation of gold
as money is, thus, a material expression of the disintegration of the
process of circulation, or of the metamorphosis of commodities, into
two separate acts independent of each other. The coin itself becomes
money as soon as its course is interrupted. In the hands of the seller
who takes it in exchange for his commodity, it is money and not coin;
as soon as it passes out of his hands it is again coin. Everybody is
a seller of the one commodity which he produces, but a buyer of all
other commodities which he needs for his existence in society. While
his selling is determined by the labor-time required for the production
of his commodity, his buying is determined by the continual renewal
of the wants of life. In order to be able to buy without having sold
anything, he must sell without buying. In fact, the circulation process
C―M―C is a dynamic unity of sale and purchase only in so far as it
constitutes at the same time the constant process of its separation.
In order that money should flow continuously as coin, coin must
constantly coagulate as money. The continuous flow of coin depends on
its constant accumulations in the form of reserve-funds of coin which
spring up throughout the sphere of circulation and form sources of
supply; the formation, distribution, disappearance, and reformation of
these reserve funds is constantly changing, their existence constantly
disappears, their disappearance constantly exists. Adam Smith expressed
this never-ceasing transformation of coin into money and of money
into coin by saying that every owner of commodities must always keep
in supply besides the particular commodity which he sells, a certain
quantity of the universal commodity with which he buys. We saw, that
in the process C―M―C the second member M―C splits up into a series of
purchases which do not take place at once, but at intervals of time,
so that one part of M circulates as money while the other rests as
money. Money is in that case only _suspended coin_ and the separate
parts of the circulating mass of coins appear now in one form, now in
another, constantly changing. This first transformation of the medium
of circulation into money represents, therefore, but a technical aspect
of money circulation.[90]

The primitive form of wealth is that of a surplus or superabundance,
i. e., that part of the products which are not immediately required as
use-values, or the possession of such products whose use-value falls
outside the sphere of mere necessaries. When considering the transition
of commodity into money we saw that this surplus or superabundance of
products constitutes the proper sphere of exchange at a low stage of
development of production. Superfluous products become exchangeable
products or commodities. The adequate form of this surplus is gold and
silver, the first form in which wealth as abstract social wealth is
preserved. Commodities can not only be stored up in the form of gold
and silver, i. e., in the substance of money, but gold and silver are
wealth in preserved form. While every use-value performs its service
as such by being consumed, i. e., destroyed, the use-value of gold as
money consists in its being the bearer of exchange value, in embodying
universal labor-time as a shapeless raw material. As shapeless metal,
exchange value possesses an indestructible form. Gold or silver thus
brought to rest as money, forms a _hoard_. Among nations with an
exclusively metallic circulation, such as the ancients were, hoarding
is practiced universally from the individual to the state which guards
its state hoard. In more ancient times, in Asia and Egypt, these
hoards under the protection of kings and priests appear rather as a
mark of their power. In Greece and Rome it was part of public policy
to accumulate state hoards as the safest and most available form of
surplus. The quick transfer of such hoards by conquerors from one
country to another and the sudden outpour of a part of these hoards
into the general circulation constitute a peculiar feature of ancient
economy.

As the incarnation of labor-time gold is a pledge for its own value,
and since it is the embodiment of _universal_ labor-time, the process
of circulation pledges gold its constant rôle of exchange value.
Owing to the mere fact that the owner of commodities can retain his
commodity in the form of exchange value or retain the exchange-value as
a commodity, the exchange of commodities for the purpose of retaining
them in the transformed shape of gold becomes circulation’s own motive.
The metamorphosis C―M takes place for the sake of the metamorphosis,
i. e., in order to transform it from particular natural wealth into
universal social wealth. Instead of change of matter, change of form
becomes its own purpose. From a mere form of the movement exchange
value becomes its substance. Commodity is preserved as wealth, as
commodity, only in so far as it keeps within the sphere of circulation,
and it keeps in that fluent state only in so far as it solidifies in
the form of silver and gold. It remains in the stream of circulation as
its crystal. At the same time gold and silver themselves become money
only in so far as they do not play the part of mediums of circulation.
_As non-mediums of circulation they become money._ The withdrawal of a
commodity from circulation in the form of gold is therefore the only
means of keeping it constantly within the sphere of circulation.

The owner of commodities can receive money from circulation only
in return for a commodity which he gives to it. Constant selling,
continual throwing of commodities into circulation is, therefore, the
first condition of hoarding from the standpoint of the circulation
of commodities. On the other hand, money as a medium of circulation
constantly disappears in the very process of circulation by being
realized all the time in use-values and becoming dissolved in fleeting
pleasures. It must, therefore, be taken out of the all-consuming
stream of circulation or the commodity must be kept up in its first
metamorphosis, so that money is prevented from performing its function
of a means of purchase. The commodity owner who has now become a
hoarder, must sell as much as possible and buy as little as possible,
as old Cato had taught: “patrem familias vendacem, non emacem esse.”
While industry constitutes the positive condition of hoarding, saving
forms the negative one. The less the equivalent of a commodity is
withdrawn from circulation in the form of particular commodities
or use-values, the more it is withdrawn in the shape of money or
exchange value.[91] The acquisition of wealth in its universal form
thus requires abstinence from wealth in its material reality. Thus
the stimulating impulse for hoarding is _greed_, the objects of which
are not commodities as use-values, but exchange value as commodity.
In order to get possession of the surplus in its universal form, the
particular wants must be treated as so much luxury and excess. Thus
the Cortes presented a report to Philipp II., in 1593, in which, among
other things, was said: “The Cortes of Valladolid in the year 1586
petitioned Your Majesty not to allow the further importation into the
Kingdom of candles, glassware, jewelry, knives and similar articles;
these things useless to human life come from abroad to be exchanged
for gold, as though the Spaniards were Indians.” The hoarder despises
the worldly, temporary and transitory enjoyments in his hunt after
the eternal treasure, which neither moth nor rust can eat, which is
perfectly celestial and earthly at the same time. “The general remote
cause of our want of money is the great excess of this Kingdom in
consuming the Commodities of Forreine Countries, which prove to us
discommodities, in hindering us of so much treasure, which otherwise
would bee brought in, in lieu of those toyes.... Wee ... consume
amongst us, that great abundance of the Wines of Spaine, of France, of
the Rhene, of the Levant ... the Raisins of Spaine, the Corints of the
Levant, the Lawnes and Cambricks of Hannaults ... the Silkes of Italie,
the Sugers and Tobaco of the West Indies, the Spices of the East
Indies: All which are of no necessetie unto us and yet are bought with
ready mony.”[92]

In the form of gold and silver, wealth is indestructible, both
because exchange value is preserved in the shape of indestructible
metal, and, especially, because gold and silver are prevented from
becoming, as mediums of circulation, mere vanishing money forms of
the commodity. The destructible substance is thus sacrificed for the
indestructible form. “If money be taken (by means of taxation) from
him, who spendeth the same ... upon eating and drinking, or any other
perishing Commodity; and the same transferred to one that bestoweth it
on Cloaths; I say that even in this case the Commonwealth hath some
little advantage; because Cloaths do not altogether perish so soon as
Meats and Drinks. But if the same be spent in Furniture of Houses,
the advantage is yet a little more; if in Building of Houses, yet
more; if in improving of Lands, working of Mines, Fishing, etc., yet
more; but most of all, in bringing Gold and Silver into the Country;
because those things are not only not perishable, but are esteemed
for Wealth at all times and everywhere; whereas other Commodities
which are perishable, or whose value depends upon the Fashion; or
which are contingently scarce and plentiful, are Wealth, but pro hic
et nunc.”[93] The withdrawal of money from the stream of circulation
and the saving of it from the social interchange of matter reaches
its extreme form in the _burying_ of money, so that social wealth is
brought as an underground indestructible treasure into a perfectly
secret private relation with the owner of commodities. Dr. Bernier, who
stayed for some time at the court of Aurenzeb at Delhi, tells us how
the merchants, especially the Mohammedan heathens, who control nearly
all the trade and all money, secretly bury their money deep in the
ground, “being imbued with the faith that the gold and silver which
they put away during their lives will serve them after death in the
next world.”[94] However, in so far as the asceticism of the hoarder is
combined with active industry, he is rather a Protestant by religion
and still more a Puritan. “It can not be denied that buying and selling
are necessary, that one can not get along without them, and that one
can buy like a Christian especially things that serve in need and in
honor; for the patriarchs had also bought and sold cattle, wool, grain,
butter, milk and other goods. They are gifts of God which He gives out
of the earth and divides among men. But foreign trade which brings
over from Calcutta, India and other such places commodities consisting
of costly silks, and gold ware, and spices which only serve for luxury
and are of no use, draining the land and the people of their money,
should not be tolerated if we but had a government of princes. Yet I
do not wish to write of that now, for I believe it will have to stop
of itself, when we have no money any longer; and so will luxury and
gluttony; for no writing or teaching will help until want and poverty
will force us.”[95]

In times of disturbance in the process of the social interchange of
matter, the burying of money takes place even in bourgeois societies
which are at a high stage of development. The social bond in its
compact form is being saved from the social movement (with the owner
of commodities this bond is the commodity and the adequate form of the
commodity is money). The social _nervus rerum_ is buried next to the
body whose nerve it is.

The hoard would now become mere useless metal, its money soul would
depart from it and it would remain as the burnt ashes of circulation,
as its caput mortuum, if it did not constantly tend to get back into
circulation. Money, or crystallized exchange value, is, according to
its nature, the form of abstract wealth; but, on the other hand, any
given sum of money is a quantitatively limited magnitude of value.
The quantitative limitation of exchange value is in contradiction
with its qualitative universality and the hoarder conceives in it a
barrier which turns, in fact, into a qualitative barrier as well and
makes of the hoard merely a limited representative of material wealth.
Money, in its capacity of a universal equivalent, appears, as we have
seen, as a member of an equation, the other member of which consists
of an endless series of commodities. It depends on the magnitude of
the exchange value to what extent money will be realized in such an
endless series, i. e., to what degree it corresponds to the conception
of it as an exchange value. The automatic movement of exchange value
as exchange value can only tend to its passing beyond its quantitative
limits. But by exceeding the quantitative limits of the hoard a new
limit is created which must be removed in its turn. There is no
definite limit which appears as a barrier to further hoarding, every
limit plays that part. Hoard accumulation has, therefore, no inherent
limits, no inherent measure; it is an endless process which finds in
each successive result an impulse for a new beginning. While the hoard
is increased only by being preserved, it is preserved only by being
increased.

Money is not only _an_ object of the passion for riches; it is _the_
object of that passion. The latter is essentially _auri sacra fames_.
The passion for riches, contrary to that for special kinds of natural
wealth or use-values, such as clothing, ornaments, herds, etc., is
possible only when universal wealth has been individualized as such
in a particular object and can, therefore, be retained in the form of
a single commodity. Money appears then no less as an object than as
a source of the passion for riches.[96] The underlying fact of the
matter is that exchange value as such and with it its increase become
the final aim. Greed holds the hoard fast by not allowing the money
to become a medium of circulation, but the thirst for gold saves the
money soul of the hoard by keeping up the lasting affinity of gold for
circulation.

To sum up, the activity by which hoards are built up resolves itself
into withdrawal of money from circulation by continually repeated
sales, and simple hoarding or _accumulation_. In fact, it is only
in the sphere of simple circulation and, especially, in the form of
hoarding, that accumulation of wealth as such takes place, while, as we
shall see later, in the case of other so-called forms of accumulation
it is only a misnomer to call them by that name in mere recollection
of the simple accumulation of money. All other commodities are hoarded
either as use-values, in which case the manner of storing them up is
determined by the peculiarities of their use-value: the storing of
grain, e. g., requires special equipment; the accumulation of sheep
makes one a shepherd; the accumulation of slaves and land creates
relations of master and servant, etc.; the accumulation of particular
kinds of wealth requires special processes different from the simple
act of hoarding, and develops special individual traits. Or, wealth
in the form of commodities is hoarded as exchange-value and in that
case hoarding appears as a commercial or a specific economic operation.
The one who carries on such operations becomes a dealer in corn, in
cattle, etc. Gold and silver are money not through some activity of
the individual who accumulates it, but as crystals of the process of
circulation which goes on without any aid on his part. He has nothing
to do but to put them aside, adding new weights of metal to his
hoard, a perfectly senseless operation which, if applied to all other
commodities, would deprive them of all value.[97]

Our hoarder appears as a martyr of exchange value, a holy ascetic
crowning the metal pillar. He cares for wealth only in its social
form and therefore he buries it away from society. He wants to have
the commodity in the form in which it is always capable of entering
circulation and therefore he withdraws it from circulation. He dreams
of exchange value and therefore does not exchange. The fluid form of
wealth and its petrification, the elixir of life and the stone of
wisdom madly haunt each other in alchemic fashion. In his imaginary
unlimited passion for enjoyment he denies himself all enjoyment.
Because he wishes to satisfy all social wants, he barely satisfies
his elementary natural wants. While holding fast to his wealth in
its metallic bodily form, the latter escapes him as a phantom. As a
matter of fact, however, the hoarding of money for the sake of money
is the barbaric form of production for production’s sake, i. e., the
development of the productive forces of social labor beyond the limits
of ordinary wants. The less the production of commodities is developed,
the more important is the first crystallization of exchange value into
money, or hoarding, which plays, therefore, an important part among
the ancient nations, in Asia until the present day, and among modern
agricultural nations where exchange value has not as yet taken hold of
all the relations of production. Before taking up the consideration
of the specific economic function of hoarding within the sphere of
metallic circulation, let us mention another form of hoarding.

Quite apart from their aesthetic properties, silver and gold
commodities are convertible into money, since the material of which
they are made is a money material; and, inversely, gold money and gold
bullion can be converted into commodities. Because gold and silver
constitute the material of abstract wealth, the greatest display
of wealth consists of the utilization of these metals as concrete
use-values, and if the owner of commodities hides his treasure at
certain stages of production, he is very anxious to appear before
other owners of commodities as _rico hombre_ whenever he can do so
with safety. He gilds himself and his house.[98] In Asia, especially
in India, where, unlike under the capitalist system, the hoarding
of wealth appears not as a subordinate function of the system of
production, but as an end in itself, gold and silver commodities are
practically but aesthetic forms of hoards. In mediaeval England gold
and silver commodities were considered before the law as mere forms of
treasure, since their value was but slightly increased by the crude
labor spent upon them. They were destined to re-enter circulation
and their fineness was therefore prescribed in the same manner as
that of coin. The increasing use of gold and silver as objects of
luxury with the growth of wealth is such a simple matter that it was
perfectly clear to the ancients,[99] while modern economists have
advanced the erroneous proposition that the use of silver and gold
articles increases not in proportion to the growth of wealth, but
in proportion to the fall in value of the precious metals. Their
otherwise accurate references to the use of Californian and Australian
gold are inconclusive, since the increased consumption of gold as a
raw material does not find justification, according to their theory,
in any corresponding decline in its value. From 1810 to 1830, in
consequence of the struggle of the American colonies against Spain and
the interruption of mining caused by revolutions, the annual average
production of precious metals declined by more than one-half. The
decline of coin in circulation in Europe amounted to nearly one-sixth,
comparing the years 1829 and 1809. Although the quantity produced had
thus declined and the cost of production, if it had changed at all,
had increased, yet the consumption of precious metals as objects of
luxury increased to an extraordinary extent in England during the very
war and on the continent after the Peace of Paris. The consumption
increased with the general growth of wealth.[100] It may be stated
as a general law that the conversion of gold and silver money into
articles of luxury prevails in times of peace, while their reconversion
into bullion or even coin takes place in stormy periods.[101] How
considerable the proportion is of the gold and silver treasure in the
form of articles of luxury to the quantity of precious metals serving
as money may be seen from the fact that in 1829 the proportion in
England, according to Jacob, was two to one, and in entire Europe and
America the precious metals in the form of articles of luxury exceeded
those in the form of money by one-fourth.

We have seen that the circulation of money is but the manifestation of
the metamorphoses of commodities, or of the form under which the social
interchange of matter takes place. With the change in the total price
of commodities in circulation or in the volume of their simultaneous
metamorphoses, the rapidity of their change of form in each case being
given, the total quantity of gold in circulation must always expand
or contract. That is possible only under the condition that the total
quantity of money in the country continually bear a varying ratio to
the quantity of money in circulation. This condition is met by the
process of hoarding. With a fall in prices or rise in the rapidity
of circulation, the hoard-reservoirs absorb that part of money which
is thrown out of circulation; with a rise in price or a decline in
the rapidity of circulation, the hoards open up and return a part
of their contents to the stream of circulation. The solidification
of circulating money into hoards and the outpouring of hoards into
circulation is a constantly oscillating movement in which the
prevalence of the one or the other tendency is determined exclusively
by fluctuations in the circulation of commodities. Hoards thus serve as
conduits for the supply and withdrawal of money to or from circulation,
so that every time only that quantity of money circulates as coin which
is required by the immediate needs of circulation. If the volume of the
entire circulation suddenly expands and the fluent unity of sale and
purchase assumes such dimensions that the total sum of prices to be
realized increases more rapidly than the rapidity of the circulation of
money, the hoards decrease perceptibly; but when the combined movement
slackens to an unusual extent, or the movement of buying and selling
steadies itself, the medium of circulation solidifies into money in
large measure, and the treasure reservoirs fill up far above their
average level. In countries with an exclusively metallic circulation
or where production is at a low stage of development, the hoards are
endlessly split up and scattered all over the land, while in countries
where the capitalist system is developed they are concentrated in bank
reservoirs. Hoards are not to be confounded with coin reservoirs, which
form a constituent part of the total supply of money in circulation,
while the interaction between hoards and currency implies the decline
or rise of its total supply. Gold and silver commodities form, as we
have seen, both conduits for the withdrawal of precious metals, as
well as sources of their supply. In ordinary times only their former
function is of importance to the economy of metallic circulation.[102]


b. MEANS OF PAYMENT.

The two forms which have so far distinguished money from the
circulating medium are those of _suspended coin_ and of the _hoard_.
The temporary transformation of coin into money in the case of the
former means that the second phase of C―M―C, namely purchase M―C,
must break up within a certain sphere of circulation into a series
of successive purchases. As to hoarding, it is simply based on the
isolation of the act C―M when it does not immediately pass into M―C,
or is but an independent development of the first metamorphosis of
a commodity; it represents money as the result of the alienation of
all commodities in contradistinction to the medium of circulation as
the embodiment of commodities in their always alienable form. Coin
reserves and hoards are money only as non-circulating mediums and
are non-circulating mediums only because they do not circulate. In
the capacity in which we consider money now, it circulates or enters
circulation, but does not perform the function of a circulating medium.
As a medium of circulation money is always a means of purchase, now it
does not act in that capacity.

As soon as money develops through the process of hoarding into the
embodiment of abstract social wealth and the tangible representative
of material wealth, it assumes in that capacity special functions
within the process of circulation. If money circulates merely as a
medium of circulation and therefore as a means of purchase, it is
understood that commodity and money confront each other at the same
time, i. e., that the same value is present in a double form: at one
pole, as a commodity in the hands of the seller; at the other pole as
money in the hands of the buyer. This simultaneous existence of the two
equivalents at opposite poles and their simultaneous change of places
or mutual alienation presupposes in its turn that seller and buyer
enter into relations as owners of equivalents that are on hand. But in
the course of time, the process of the metamorphosis of commodities
which produces the different forms of money, transforms also the owners
of commodities or changes the character in which they appear before
each other in the community. In the process of metamorphosis of the
commodity the guardian of the latter changes his skin as often as
the commodity changes place or as the money assumes new forms. Thus,
the owners of commodities originally confronted each other only as
commodity owners, but later on they became one a buyer, the other a
seller; then each became alternately buyer and seller, then hoarders,
and finally rich men. In that manner, the owners of commodities do not
come out of the process of circulation the same men that they entered.
In fact the different forms which money assumes in the process of
circulation are but crystallized changes of form of the commodities
themselves, which in their turn are but concrete expressions of the
changing social relations in which commodity owners carry on the
interchange of matter with one another. New trade relations spring up
in the process of circulation, and, as representatives of these changed
relations, commodity owners assume new economic roles. Just as gold
becomes idealized within the process of circulation and plain paper,
in its capacity of a representative of gold, performs the function
of money, so does the same process of circulation lend the weight of
actual seller and buyer to the buyer and seller who enter it merely as
representatives of future money and future commodities.

All the forms in which gold develops into money, are but the unfolding
of potentialities which the metamorphosis of commodities bears within
itself. These forms did not become distinctly differentiated in the
process of simple money circulation where money appears as coin and
the movement C―M―C forms a dynamic unity; at most, they appeared
as mere potentialities as, e. g., in the case of the break in the
metamorphosis of a commodity. We have seen that in the process C―M
the relations between the commodity and money were those of an actual
use-value and ideal exchange-value to an actual exchange value and
only ideal use-value. By alienating his commodity as a use-value the
seller realized its own exchange value and the use-value of money. On
the contrary, the buyer, by alienating his money as exchange value,
realized its own use-value and the price of the commodity. Commodity
and money changed places accordingly. When it comes to a realization
in actual life of this bi-polar contrast, a new break occurs. The
seller actually alienates his commodity, but realizes its price only in
idea: he has sold his commodity at its price, which is to be realized,
however, only subsequently, at a time agreed upon. The purchaser buys
as the representative of future money, while the vender sells as the
owner of present goods. On the part of the vender, the commodity as
use-value is actually alienated, without the price being actually
realized; on the part of the purchaser, money is actually realized
in the use-value of the commodity, without being actually alienated
as exchange value. Instead of a token of value representing money
symbolically as was the case before, the purchaser himself performs
that part now. And just as in the former case the symbolic nature of
the token of value called forth the guarantee of the state which has
made it legal tender, so does the personal symbolism of the buyer bring
about legally enforcible private contracts among commodity owners.

The contrary may happen in the process M―C, where the money can be
alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way the price of the
commodity can be realized before the use-value of the money is realized
and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly under
the everyday form of pre-payments. And it is under this form that the
English government purchases opium from the ryots of India, or, foreign
merchants residing in Russia mostly buy agricultural products. In these
cases, however, the money always acts in its well known role of a means
of purchase and therefore, does not assume any new forms.[103] We need
not dwell, therefore, on this case any longer; but with reference to
the changed form which the two processes M―C and C―M assume now, we
may note that the difference between purchase and sale which appeared
but imaginary in the direct process of circulation, now becomes a real
difference, since in the former case only the money is present and in
the latter only the commodity, and in either case only that extreme is
present from which the initiative comes. Besides, the two forms have
this in common: that in either, one of the equivalents is present only
in the common will of the buyer and seller,―a will that is binding on
both and assumes definite legal forms.

Seller and buyer become creditor and debtor. While the commodity
owner looked comical as the guardian of a treasure, he now becomes
awe-inspiring, since he no longer identifies himself but his neighbor
with a certain sum of money and makes him and not himself a martyr of
exchange value. From a believer he becomes a creditor, for religion he
substitutes law.

  “I stay here on my bond!”

Thus, in the modified form C―M in which the commodity is present and
money is only represented, money plays first of all the part of a
measure of value. The exchange value of the commodity is estimated in
money as its measure; but as exchange value, established by contract,
price exists not only in the mind of the seller, but also as a measure
of obligation on the part of the buyer. Besides serving as a measure of
value, money plays here the part of a means of purchase, although in
that capacity it only casts ahead the shadow of its future existence.
It attracts the commodity from its position in the hand of the seller
into that of the buyer. As soon as the term of the contract expires,
money enters circulation, since it changes its position by passing
from the hands of the former buyer into those of the former seller.
But it does not enter circulation as a circulating medium or as a
means of purchase. It performed those functions before it was present
and it appears after it has ceased to perform them. It now enters
circulation as the only adequate equivalent of the commodity, as the
absolute form of existence of exchange value, as the last word of the
process of exchange, in short as money, and money in its distinct role
of a _universal means of payment_. In this capacity of a means of
payment money appears as the absolute commodity, but within the sphere
of circulation and not without it as was the case with hoards. The
difference between the means of purchase and the means of payment makes
itself unpleasantly felt in periods of commercial crises.[104]

Originally, the conversion of the product into money in the sphere of
circulation appears only as an individual necessity for the commodity
owner in so far as his own product has no use-value to him, but has
to acquire it first by being alienated. But in order to pay at the
expiration of the contract, he must have sold commodities before that.
Thus, entirely apart from his individual wants, the movement of the
circulation process makes selling a social necessity with every owner
of commodities. As a former buyer of a commodity he is compelled to
become a seller of another commodity in order to get money not as a
means of purchase but as a means of payment, as the absolute form of
exchange value. The conversion of commodity into money as a final act,
or the first metamorphosis of a commodity as an end in itself which in
the case of hoarding seemed to be a matter of caprice on the part of
the commodity owner, becomes now an economic function. The motive and
essence of sale for the sake of payment becomes from a mere form of the
process of circulation its self emanating substance.

In this form of sale the commodity completes its change of position;
it circulates while it postpones its first metamorphosis, viz. its
transformation into money. On the contrary, on the part of the buyer
the second metamorphosis is completed, i. e. money is reconverted
into a commodity before the first metamorphosis has taken place,
i. e., before the commodity has been turned into money. The first
metamorphosis thus takes place after the second in point of time;
and thereby, money i. e. the form of the commodity in its first
metamorphosis, acquires a new destination. Money or the spontaneous
development of exchange value, is no longer a mere intermediary form of
the circulation of commodities, but its final result.

That such _time sales_ in which the two poles of the sale are separated
in point of time, have their natural origin in the simple circulation
of commodities, requires no elaborate proof. In the first place, the
development of circulation leads to a continual repetition of the
mutual transactions between the same commodity owners who confront
each other as seller and buyer. The repetition is not accidental; on
the contrary, goods are ordered, let us say, for a certain date in the
future when they are to be delivered and paid for. In that case the
sale is ideal, i. e. it is legally accomplished without the actual
presence of the goods and money. Both forms of money, those of a medium
of circulation and of a means of payment still coincide here, since
in the first place, commodity and money change places simultaneously,
and secondly, the money does not buy the commodity, but realizes the
price of the commodity purchased before. In the second place, the
nature of a great many use-values makes the simultaneous alienation
and delivery of the goods impossible, and delivery has to be postponed
for a certain time; e. g., when the use of a house is sold for one
month, the use-value of the house is delivered only at the expiration
of the month, although it changes hands at the beginning of the month.
Since the actual transfer of the use-value and its virtual alienation
are separated here in point of time, the realization of its price
occurs also after its change of place. Finally, the difference in
the seasons and in the length of time required for the production of
various commodities brings about a situation where one tries to sell
his goods, while the other is not ready to buy; and with the repeated
purchases and sales between the same commodity owners the two ends
of sale fall apart according to the conditions of production of the
respective commodities. Thus arises a relation of creditor and debtor
between the owners of commodities which, though constituting the
natural foundation of the credit system, may be fully developed before
the latter comes into existence. It is clear that with the extension
of the credit system, and, consequently, with the development of the
capitalist system of production in general, the function of money as a
means of payment will extend at the expense of its function as a means
of purchase and, still more, as an element of hoarding. In England, e.
g., money as coin has been almost completely banished into the sphere
of retail and petty trade between producers and consumers, while it
dominates the sphere of large commercial transactions as a means of
payment.[105]

As the universal means of payment money becomes the _universal
commodity_ of all contracts, at first only in the sphere of
circulation of commodities.[106] But with the development of this
function of money, all other forms of payment are gradually converted
into money payments. The extent to which money is developed as the
exclusive means of payment indicates the degree to which exchange value
has taken hold of production in its depth and breadth.[107]

The volume of money in circulation, as a means of payment, is
determined in the first place, by the amount of payments, i. e. by the
sum total of the prices of the commodities alienated, but not about to
be alienated, as in the case of the simple circulation of money. The
quantity thus determined is subject, however, to two modifications.
The first modification is due to the rapidity with which the same
piece of money repeats the same function, i. e. with which the several
payments succeed one another. A pays B, whereupon B pays C, and so
forth. The rapidity with which the same coin repeats its function
as a means of payment, depends first, upon the continuity of the
relation of creditor and debtor among the owners of commodities, the
same commodity owner being the creditor of one person and the debtor
of another, etc., and secondly, upon the interval which separates the
times of various payments. This chain of payments or of supplementary
first metamorphoses of commodities is qualitatively different from the
chain of metamorphoses which is formed by the circulation of money as a
circulating medium. The latter not only makes its appearance gradually,
but is even formed in that manner. A commodity is first converted
into money, then again into a commodity, thereby enabling another
commodity to become money, etc.; or, seller becomes buyer, whereby
another commodity owner turns seller. This successive connection is
accidentally formed in the very process of the exchange of commodities.
But when the money which A has paid to B is passed on from B to C,
from C to D, etc., and that, too, at intervals rapidly succeeding one
another, then this external connection reveals but an already existing
social connection. The same money passes through different hands not
because it appears as a means of payment; it passes as a means of
payment because the different hands have already clasped each other.
The rapidity with which money circulates as a means of payment thus
shows that individuals have been drawn into the process of circulation
much deeper than would be indicated by the same rapidity of the
circulation of money as coin or as a means of purchase.

The sum total of prices made up by all the purchases and sales taking
place at the same time, and, therefore, side by side, constitutes the
limit for the substitution of the volume of coin by the rapidity of its
circulation. If the payments that are to be made simultaneously are
concentrated at one place―which naturally arises at first at points
where the circulation of commodities is largest―the payments balance
each other as negative and positive quantities: A is under obligations
to pay B, while he has to be paid by C. etc. The quantity of money
required as a means of payment will, therefore, be determined not by
the total amount of payments which have to be made simultaneously, but
by the greater or less concentration of the same and by the magnitude
of the balance remaining after their mutual neutralization as negative
and positive quantities. Special arrangements are made for settlements
of this kind even where the credit system is not developed at all,
as was the case e. g. in ancient Rome. The consideration of these
arrangements, however, as well as that of the general time limits of
payment, which are everywhere established among certain elements in the
community, does not belong here. We may add that the specific influence
which these time settlements exert on the periodic fluctuations in the
quantity of money in circulation, has been scientifically investigated
but lately.

In so far as the payments mutually balance as positive and negative
quantities, no money actually appears on the scene. It figures here
only in its capacity of a measure of value: first, in the prices of
commodities, and second, in the magnitude of mutual obligations. Aside
from its ideal form, exchange value does not exist here independently,
not even in the form of a token of value; that is to say, money plays
here only the part of ideal money of account. The function of money
as a means of payment thus implies a contradiction. On the one hand,
in so far as payments balance, it serves only ideally as a measure of
value. On the other hand, in so far as a payment has actually to be
made, money enters circulation not as a transient circulating medium,
but as the final resting form of the universal equivalent, as the
absolute commodity, in a word, as money. Therefore, whenever such a
thing as a chain of payments and an artificial system of settling them,
is developed, money suddenly changes its visionary nebulous shape as a
measure of value, turning into hard cash or means of payment, as soon
as some shock causes a violent interruption of the flow of payments and
disturbs the mechanism of their settlement. Thus, under conditions of
fully developed capitalist production, where the commodity owner has
long become a capitalist, knows his Adam Smith, and condescendingly
laughs at the superstition that gold and silver alone constitute money
or that money differs at all from other commodities as the absolute
commodity, money suddenly reappears not as a medium of circulation,
but as the only adequate form of exchange value, as the only form of
wealth, exactly as it is looked upon by the hoarder. In its capacity
of such an exclusive form of wealth, it reveals itself, unlike under
the monetary system, not in mere imaginary, but in actual depreciation
and worthlessness of all material wealth. That is what constitutes
the particular phase of crises of the world market which is known as
a money crisis. The _summum bonum_ for which everybody is crying at
such times as for the only form of wealth, is cash, hard cash; and by
the side of it all other commodities just because they are use-values,
appear useless like so many trifles and toys, or, as our Dr. Martin
Luther says, as mere objects of ornament and gluttony. This sudden
reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps
theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by
whose agency circulation is affected shudder before the impenetrable
mystery in which their own economical relations are involved.[108]

Payments, in their turn, require the formation of reserve funds,
the accumulation of money as a means of payment. The building up of
reserve funds appears no longer as a practice carried on outside of
the sphere of circulation, as in the case of hoarding; nor as a mere
technical accumulation of coin, as in the case of coin reserves; on the
contrary, money must now be gradually accumulated to be available on
certain future dates when payments become due. While hoarding, in its
abstract form as a means of enrichment, declines with the development
of the capitalist system of production, that species of hoarding which
is directly called for by the process of production, increases; or, to
put it differently, a part of the treasure which is generally formed
in the sphere of circulation of commodities, is absorbed as a reserve
fund of means of payment. The more developed the capitalist system of
production, the more these reserve funds are limited to the necessary
minimum. Locke, in his work “On the Lowering of Interest”[109]
furnishes interesting data with reference to the size of these reserve
funds in his time. They show what a considerable part of the total
money in circulation the reservoirs for means of payment absorbed in
England just at the time when banking began to develop.

The law as to quantity of money in circulation, as it has been
formulated in the analysis of the simple circulation of money, receives
an essential modification when the circulation of the means of payment
is taken into account. The rapidity of the circulation of money whether
as circulating medium or as means of payment―being given, the total
amount of money in circulation at a given time will be determined by
the sum total of the prices of commodities to be realized, _plus_ the
total amount of payments falling due at the same time, _minus_ the
amount of payments balancing each other. The general law that the
volume of money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities is
not affected by this in the least, since the extent of the payments
is itself determined by the prices stipulated in contracts. What is,
however, strikingly demonstrated, is that even if the rapidity of
circulation and the economy of payments be assumed to remain the same,
the sum total of the prices of the commodities circulating in a given
period of time, say one day, and the volume of money in circulation on
the same day are by no means equal, because there is a large number
of commodities in circulation whose prices have yet to be realized in
money at a future date, and there is a quantity of money in circulation
which constitutes the payment for commodities which have long gone out
of circulation. The latter amount will depend on the sum of payments
falling due on the same day although contracted for at entirely
different periods.

We have seen that a change in the values of gold and silver does not
affect their function as measures of value or money of account. But
this change is of decisive importance for money as a hoard, since
with the rise or fall of value of gold and silver, the total value
of a gold or silver hoard will also rise or fall. Of still greater
importance is the effect of this change on money as a means of payment.
The payment takes place after the sale of the commodity, or the money
serves in two different capacities at two different periods; first, as
a measure of value, then as a means of payment corresponding to the
measurement. If, during this interval, the value of the precious metals
or the labor-time necessary for their production undergoes a change,
the same quantity of gold or silver will be worth more or less when
it appears as a means of payment than what it was when it served as a
measure of value, i. e., when the contract was concluded. The function
of a particular commodity, like gold or silver, to serve as money or
independent exchange value comes here in conflict with the nature of
the particular commodity whose magnitude of value depends on changes in
the cost of its production. The great social revolution which caused
the fall in value of the precious metals in Europe, is as well known as
the revolution of an opposite character which had been brought about
at an early period in the history of the ancient Roman republic by the
rise in value of copper in terms of which the debts of the plebeians
had been contracted. Without attempting here to follow any further
the fluctuations of value of the precious metals and their effect on
the system of bourgeois political economy, it is at once apparent
that a fall in the value of the precious metals favors the debtors at
the expense of the creditors, while a rise in their value favors the
creditors at the expense of the debtors.


c. WORLD MONEY.

Gold becomes money as distinguished from coin only after it is
withdrawn from circulation in the shape of a hoard; it then enters
circulation as a non-medium of circulation, and finally breaks through
the barriers of home circulation to assume the part of a universal
equivalent in the world of commodities. It becomes _world money_.

While the general measures of weight of the precious metals served as
their original measures of value, the reverse process takes place now
in the world market, and the reckoning names of money are turned back
into corresponding weight names. In the same way, while shapeless crude
metal (aes rude) was the original form of the medium of circulation
and the coin form constituted but the official stamp certifying that a
given piece of metal was of a certain weight, now the precious metal
in its capacity of a world coin throws off its stamp and shape and
reassumes the indistinguishable bullion form; and even if national
coins, such as Russian imperials, Mexican dollars, and English
sovereigns, do circulate abroad, their name is of no importance,
and only their contents count. Finally, as international money, the
precious metals come again to perform their original function of
mediums of exchange, which, like the exchange of commodities, arose
first not within the various primitive communities, but at their points
of contact with one another. As world money, money thus reassumes its
primitive form. On leaving the sphere of home circulation, it strips
off the particular forms which it has acquired in the course of the
development of the process of exchange within that particular national
sphere, those local garbs of standard of price, of coin, of auxiliary
coin, and of token of value.

We have seen that in the home circulation of a country, only one
commodity serves as a measure of value. Since, however, that function
is performed by gold in some countries and by silver in others, there
is a double standard of value in the world market and money assumes
two forms in all its other functions. The translation of the values
of commodities from gold prices into silver prices and vice versa
depends in each case upon the relative value of the two metals, which
is constantly changing and, therefore, appears to be constantly in the
process of determination. Commodity owners in every national sphere
of circulation have to use gold and silver alternately for foreign
circulation and thus to exchange the metal which is accepted as money
at home for the metal which they happen to need as money abroad. Every
nation is, therefore, utilizing both metals, gold and silver, as world
money.

In the international circulation of commodities, gold and silver appear
not as mediums of circulation, but as universal mediums of exchange.
The universal medium of exchange performs its function only under its
two developed forms of a means of purchase and of a means of payment,
whose mutual relation in the world market is the very reverse of what
it is at home. In the sphere of home circulation, money in the form of
coin, played exclusively the part of a means of purchase, either as the
intermediary in the dynamic unity C―M―C or as the representative of the
transient form of exchange value in the unceasing change of positions
by commodities. In the world market it is just the contrary. Gold and
silver appear here as a means of purchase when the exchange of matter
is but one-sided, and purchase and sale do not coincide. The frontier
trade at Kiachta e. g. is both actually and according to treaty, one
of barter, in which silver plays only the part of a measure of value.
The war of 1857-58 compelled the Chinese to sell without buying. Silver
suddenly appeared now as a means of purchase. Out of regard to the
letter of the treaty, the Russians made up the French five frank coins
into crude silver commodities, which were made to serve as a means
of exchange. Silver has always served as a means of purchase between
Europe and America on one side and Asia on the other, where it settles
down in the form of hoards. Furthermore, the precious metals serve
as international means of purchase whenever the ordinary balance of
exchange of matter between two nations is suddenly upset, as e. g. when
a failure of crops forces one of them to buy on an extraordinary scale.
Finally, the precious metals are international means of purchase in
the hands of gold and silver producing countries, in which case they
directly constitute a product and commodity and not merely a converted
form of a commodity. The more the exchange of commodities between
different national spheres of circulation is developed, the more
important becomes the function of world money to serve as a _means of
payment_ for the settlement of international balances.

Like home circulation, international circulation requires a constantly
changing quantity of gold and silver. A part of the accumulated hoards
serves therefore, in each country as a reserve fund of world money,
which now declines, now rises, according to the fluctuations of the
exchange of commodities.[110] Besides the special movements which take
place between national spheres of circulation, world-money possesses
a universal movement, whose starting points are at the sources of
production from which gold and silver streams spread out in different
directions all over the world market. Here gold and silver enter the
world circulation as commodities and are exchanged for commodity
equivalents in proportion to the labor-time contained in them, before
they penetrate national spheres of circulation. In the latter, they
appear now with a given magnitude of value. Every fall or rise in the
cost of their production equally affects, therefore, their relative
value throughout the world market; on the other hand, that value is
entirely independent of the extent to which the different national
spheres of circulation absorb gold or silver. The part of the metal
stream which is caught up by every separate sphere in the world of
commodities, partly enters directly the home circulation of money
to make up for worn out coin; partly is dammed up in the different
reservoirs containing hoards of coin, means of payment and world-money;
partly is turned into articles of luxury, while the rest simply forms
a treasure. At an advanced stage of development of the capitalist
system of production the formation of hoards is reduced to the minimum
required by the various processes of circulation for the free play
of their mechanism. The hoard as such becomes idle wealth, unless it
appears as a temporary form of a surplus resulting from a favorable
balance of payments or as the result of an interrupted exchange of
matter, i. e. as the solidification of a commodity in its first
metamorphosis.

Gold and silver, in their capacity of money, being by conception
universal commodities, assume in their capacity of world money the
form adapted to a universal commodity. To the extent to which all
commodities are exchanged for them, they become the transformed
impersonation of all commodities and, therefore, universally alienable
commodities. Their function of serving as the embodiment of universal
labor-time is realized more and more as the interchange of matter
produced by concrete labor embraces increasing parts of the world.
They become universal equivalents to the extent to which the series
of particular equivalents which constitute their spheres of exchange,
increases. Since in the sphere of world circulation commodities unfold
their own exchange value on a universal scale, they assume the form
of world money when transformed into gold and silver. As commodity
owning nations are thus turning gold into money by their diversified
industry and universal trade, industry and trade appear to them only as
a means of getting money out of the world market in the shape of gold
and silver. Gold and silver, as world money, are, therefore, as much
products of the universal circulation of commodities as they are means
of widening its sphere. Like chemistry which grew up behind the backs
of the alchemists who tried to find a way of making gold, so do the
sources of world industry and world trade spring up behind the backs
of the owners of commodities, while they are hunting for the commodity
in its magic form. Gold and silver help to create the world market by
anticipating its existence in their conception of money. That this
magic effect of the precious metals is by no means confined to the
period of infancy of capitalist society but is a necessary outgrowth
of the perverse conception which the representatives of the commodity
world have of their own work in society, is shown by the extraordinary
influence exerted in the middle of the nineteenth century by the
discovery of new gold fields.

Just as money develops into world-money, so the commodity owner
develops into a cosmopolitan. The cosmopolitan relation of men is
originally only a relation of commodity owners. The commodity as such
rises above all religious, political, national, and language barriers.
Price is its universal language and money, its common form. But with
the development of world-money as distinguished from national coin,
there develops the cosmopolitanism of the commodity owner as the faith
of practical reason opposed to traditional, religious, national and
other prejudices which hinder the interchange of matter among mankind.
As the identical gold that lands in England in the form of American
eagles, turns there into sovereigns and three days later circulates in
Paris in the form of Napoleons, only to emerge in Venice in a few weeks
as so many ducats, retaining all the while the same value, it becomes
clear to the commodity owner that nationality “is but the guinea’s
stamp.” The lofty idea which he conceives of the entire world is that
of a market, the _world market_.[111]


4. THE PRECIOUS METALS.

The process of capitalist production first of all takes hold of the
metallic circulation as of a ready, transmitted organ which, though
undergoing a gradual transformation, always retains its fundamental
structure. The question as to why gold and silver and not other
commodities serve as money material falls outside the limits of the
capitalist system. We shall, therefore, confine ourselves to summing
up the most essential points.

Since universal labor-time admits of quantitative differences only,
the object which is to serve as its specific incarnation must be
capable of representing purely quantitative differences, i. e., it
must be homogeneous and uniform in quality throughout. That is the
first condition a commodity must satisfy to perform the function of
a measure of value. If commodities were estimated in oxen, hides,
grain, etc., they would really have to be estimated in an ideal average
ox, or average hide, since there are qualitative differences between
an ox and an ox, grain and grain, hide and hide. On the contrary,
gold and silver, as elementary substances, are always the same,
and equal quantities of them represent, therefore, values of equal
magnitude.[112] The other condition which a commodity that is to serve
as a universal equivalent must satisfy and which follows directly from
its function of representing purely quantitative differences, is that
it must be capable of being divided and re-united at will, so that
money of account may be represented materially as well. Gold and
silver possess these properties to a superior degree.

As mediums of circulation, gold and silver have this advantage over
other commodities, that their high specific gravity which condenses
much weight in little space, corresponds to their economic specific
gravity which condenses relatively much labor-time, i. e. a great
quantity of exchange value in a small volume. This insures facility
of transport, of transition from hand to hand and from one country to
another, the ability to appear as rapidly as to disappear, in short,
that material mobility which constitutes the _sine qua non_ of the
commodity that is to serve as the _perpetuum mobile_ of the process of
circulation.

The high specific value of the precious metals, their durability,
comparative indestructibility, insusceptibility of oxidation through
the action of the air, in the case of gold insolubility in acids
except in aqua regia,―all these natural properties make the precious
metals the natural material for hoarding. Peter Martyr who seems to
have been a great lover of chocolate, remarks, therefore, of the
cacao-bags which formed a species of Mexican gold: “O felicem monetam,
quae suavem utilemque praebet humano generi potum, et a tartarea peste
avaritiae suos immunes servat possessores, quod suffodi aut diu servari
nequeat.”[113]

The great importance of metals in general in the direct process of
production is due to the part they play as instruments of production.
Apart from their scarcity, the great softness of gold and silver as
compared with iron and even copper (in the hardened state in which it
was used by the ancients), makes them unfit for that application and
deprives them, therefore, to a great extent, of that property on which
the use-value of metals is generally based. Useless as they are in the
direct process of production, they are easily dispensed with as means
of existence, as articles of consumption. For that reason any desired
quantity of them may be absorbed by the social process of circulation
without disturbing the processes of direct production and consumption.
Their individual use-value does not come in conflict with their
economic function. Furthermore, gold and silver are not only negatively
superfluous, i. e. dispensable articles, but their aesthetic properties
make them the natural material of luxury, ornamentation, splendor,
festive occasions, in short, the positive form of abundance and wealth.
They appear, in a way, as spontaneous light brought out from the
underground world, since silver reflects all rays of light in their
original combination, and gold only the color of highest intensity,
viz. red light. The sensation of color is, generally speaking, the most
popular form of aesthetic sense. The etymological connection between
the names of the precious metals, and the relations of colors, in the
different Indo-Germanic languages has been established by Jacob Grimm
(see his History of the German Language).

Finally, the susceptibility of gold and silver of being turned from
coin into bullion, from bullion into articles of luxury and vice versa,
i. e. the advantage they possess as against other commodities in not
being tied down to a definite, exclusive form in which they can be
used, makes them the natural material of money, which must constantly
change from one form to another.

Nature no more produces money than it does bankers or discount
rates. But since the capitalist system of production requires the
crystallization of wealth as a fetich in the form of a single article,
gold and silver appear as its appropriate incarnation. Gold and silver
are not money by nature, but money is by nature gold and silver. In the
first place, the silver or gold money crystal is not only the product
of the process of circulation, but in fact its only final product. In
the second place, gold and silver are ready and direct products of
nature, not distinguished by any difference of form. The universal
product of the social process or the social process itself as a product
is a peculiar natural product, a metal hidden in the bowels of the
earth and extracted therefrom.[114]

We have seen that gold and silver are unable to fulfill the
requirements which they are expected to meet in their capacity of
money, viz. to remain values of unvarying magnitude. Still, as
Aristotle had already observed, they possess a more constant value than
the average of other commodities. Apart from the universal effect of an
appreciation or depreciation of the precious metals, the fluctuations
in the ratio between the values of gold and silver has a special
importance, since both serve side by side in the world market as money
material. The purely economic causes of this change of value must be
traced to the change in the labor-time required for the production of
these metals; conquests and other political upheavals which exercised
a great influence on the value of metals in the ancient world, have
nowadays only a local and transitory effect. The labor-time required
for the production of the metals will depend on the degree of their
natural scarcity, as well as on the greater or less difficulty with
which they can be obtained in a purely metallic state. As a matter of
fact, gold is the first metal discovered by man. This is due to the
fact that nature itself furnishes it partly in pure crystalline form,
individualized, free from chemical combination with other substances,
or, as the alchemists used to say, in a virgin state; and so far as
it does not appear in that state, nature does the technical work in
the great gold washeries of rivers. Only the crudest kind of labor is
thus required of man in the extraction of gold, either from rivers or
from alluvial deposits; while the extraction of silver presupposes the
development of mining and a comparatively high degree of technical
skill generally. For that reason the value of silver is originally
greater than that of gold in spite of the lesser absolute scarcity of
the former. Strabo’s assertion that a certain Arabian tribe gave ten
pounds of gold for one pound of iron and two pounds of gold for one
pound of silver, seems by no means incredible. But as the productive
powers of labor in society are developed and the product of unskilled
labor rises in value as compared with the product of skilled labor;
as the earth’s crust is more thoroughly broken up and the original
superficial sources of gold supply give out, the value of silver begins
to fall in proportion to that of gold. At a given stage of development
of engineering and of the means of communication, the discovery of
new gold or silver fields become the decisive factor. In ancient Asia
the ratio of gold to silver was 6 to 1 or 8 to 1; the latter ratio
prevailed in China and Japan as late as the beginning of the nineteenth
century; 10 to 1, the ratio in Xenophon’s time, may be considered as
the average ratio of the middle period of antiquity. The exploitation
of the Spanish silver mines by Carthage and later by Rome had about the
same effect in antiquity, as the discovery of the American mines in
modern Europe. For the period of the Roman empire 15 or 16 to 1 may be
assumed as a rough average, although we frequently find cases of still
greater depreciation of silver in Rome. The same movement beginning
with the relative depreciation of gold and concluding with the fall
in the value of silver, is repeated in the following epoch which has
lasted from the Middle Ages to the present time. As in Xenophon’s times
the average ratio in the Middle Ages was 10 to 1, changing to 16 or
15 to 1 in consequence of the discovery of the American mines. The
discovery of the Australian, Californian and Columbian gold sources
makes a new fall in the value of gold probable.[115]


C. THEORIES OF THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND OF MONEY.

As the universal thirst for gold prompted nations and princes in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the period of infancy of modern
bourgeois society, to crusades beyond the sea in search of the golden
grail,[116] the first interpreters of the modern world, the founders
of the monetary system, of which the mercantile system is but a
variation, proclaimed gold and silver, i. e. money, as the only thing
that constitutes wealth. They were quite right when, from the point
of view of the simple circulation of commodities, they declared that
the mission of bourgeois society was to make money, i. e. to build up
everlasting treasures which neither moth nor rust could eat. It is
no argument with the monetary system to say that a ton of iron whose
price is £3 constitutes a value of the same magnitude as £3 worth
of gold. The point here is not the magnitude of the exchange value,
but as to what constitutes its adequate form. If the monetary and
mercantile systems single out international trade and the particular
branches of national industry directly connected with that trade as
the only true sources of wealth or money, it must be borne in mind,
that in that period the greater part of national production was still
carried on under forms of feudalism and was the source from which
producers drew directly their means of subsistence. Products, as a
rule, were not turned into commodities nor, therefore, into money;
they did not enter into the general social interchange of matter; did
not, therefore, appear as embodiments of universal abstract labor;
and did not, in fact, constitute bourgeois wealth. Money as the end
and object of circulation is exchange value or abstract wealth, but
it is no material element of wealth and does not form the directing
goal and impelling motive of production. True to the conditions as
they prevailed in that primitive stage of bourgeois production, those
unrecognized prophets held fast to the pure, tangible, and resplendent
form of exchange value, to its form of a universal commodity as against
all special commodities. The proper bourgeois economic sphere of that
period was the sphere of the circulation of commodities. Hence, they
judged the entire complex process of bourgeois production from the
point of view of that elementary sphere and confounded money with
capital. The unceasing war of modern economists against the monetary
and mercantile system is mostly due to the fact that this system blabs
out in brutally naive fashion, the secret of bourgeois production, viz.
its subjection to the domination of exchange value. Ricardo, though
wrong in the application he makes of it, remarks somewhere that even in
times of famine, grain is imported not because the nation is starving,
but because the grain dealer is making money. In its criticism of the
monetary and mercantile system, political economy, by attacking that
system as a mere illusion and as a false theory, fails to recognize in
it the barbaric form of its own fundamental principles. Furthermore,
this system has not only an historic justification, but within
certain spheres of modern economy retains until now the full rights
of citizenship. At all stages of the bourgeois system of production
in which wealth assumes the elementary form of a commodity, exchange
value assumes the elementary form of money and in all phases of the
process of production wealth reassumes for a moment the universal
elementary commodity form. Even at the most advanced stage of bourgeois
economy, the specific functions of gold and silver to serve as money,
in contradistinction to their function of mediums of circulation―a
function which distinguishes them from all other commodities―is not
done away with, but only limited, hence the monetary and mercantile
system retains its right of citizenship. The Catholic fact that gold
and silver are contrasted with other profane commodities as the direct
incarnation of social labor, that is as the expression of abstract
wealth, naturally offends the Protestant point d’honneur of bourgeois
economy, and out of fear of the prejudices of the monetary system
it had lost for a long time its grasp of the phenomena of money
circulation, as will be shown presently.

It was quite natural that, contrary to the monetary and mercantile
system which knew money only in its form of a crystallized product
of circulation, classical political economy should have conceived
money first of all in its fluent form of exchange value arising and
disappearing within the process of the metamorphosis of commodities.
And since the circulation of commodities is regarded exclusively in the
form of C―M―C and the latter in its turn, exclusively in its aspect of
a dynamic unity of sale and purchase, money comes to be regarded in
its capacity of a medium of circulation as opposed to its capacity of
money. And when that medium of circulation is isolated in its function
of coin, it turns, as we have seen, into a token of value. But since
classical political economy had to deal with metallic circulation as
the prevailing form of circulation, it defined metallic money as coin,
and metallic coin as a mere token of value. In accordance with the
law governing the circulation of tokens of value, the proposition was
advanced that the prices of commodities depend on the quantity of money
in circulation instead of the opposite principle that the quantity of
money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities. We find
this view more or less clearly expressed by the Italian economists of
the seventeenth century; LOCKE now asserts, now denies that principle;
it is clearly elaborated in the “Spectator” (of October 19, 1711)
by MONTESQUIEU AND HUME. Since Hume was by far the most important
representative of this theory in the eighteenth century, we shall
commence our review with him.

Under certain assumptions, an increase or decrease in the quantity
either of the metallic money in circulation, or of the tokens of value
in circulation seems to affect _uniformly_ the prices of commodities.
With each fall or rise of the _value_ of gold or silver in which the
exchange values of commodities are estimated as prices, there is a rise
or fall of prices, because of the change in their measure of value; as
a result of the rise or fall of prices, a greater or smaller quantity
of gold and silver is circulating as coin. But the apparent phenomenon
is the fall in prices―the exchange value of commodities remaining the
same―accompanied by an increased or diminished quantity of the medium
of circulation. On the other hand, if the quantity of tokens of value
rises above or falls below its required level, it is forcibly reduced
to the latter by a fall or rise of prices. In either case the same
effect seems to be brought about by the same cause, and Hume holds fast
to this semblance.

Every scientific inquiry into the relation between the volume of the
circulating medium and the movement of prices must assume the value
of the money material as given. Hume, on the contrary, considers
exclusively periods of revolution in the value of the precious metals,
i. e. revolutions in the measure of value. The rise of prices which
occurred simultaneously with the increase of metallic money after the
discovery of the American mines forms the historical background of his
theory, while his polemic against the monetary and mercantile system
furnishes its practical motive. The importation of precious metals can
naturally increase while their cost of production remains the same.
On the other hand, a decrease in their value, i. e. in the labor-time
required for their production will reveal itself first of all in
their increased imports. Hence, said the later followers of Hume, a
decrease in the value of the precious metals, reveals itself in an
increased volume of the circulating medium, and the increased volume
of the latter is shown in the rise of prices. As a matter of fact,
however, the rise in price affects only exported commodities, which
are exchanged for gold and silver as commodities and not as mediums
of circulation. Thus, the prices of these commodities, which are now
estimated in gold and silver of lower value, rise as compared with
the prices of all other commodities whose exchange value continues
to be estimated in gold or silver according to the standard of their
old cost of production. This twofold appraisement of the exchange
values of commodities in the same country can naturally be only
temporary, and the gold and silver prices must become equalized in
the proportions determined by the exchange values themselves, so that
finally the exchange values of all commodities come to be estimated
according to the new value of the money material. The development of
this process, as well as the ways and means in which the exchange value
of commodities asserts itself within the limits of the fluctuations
of market prices, do not fall within the scope of this work. But that
this equalization takes place but gradually in the early periods of
development of bourgeois production and extends over long periods of
time, never keeping pace with the increase of cash in circulation,
has been strikingly demonstrated by new critical investigations of
the movement of prices of commodities in the sixteenth century.[117]
The favorite references of Hume’s followers to the rise of prices
in ancient Rome in consequence of the conquests of Macedonia, Egypt
and Asia Minor, are quite irrelevant. The characteristic method of
antiquity of suddenly transferring hoarded treasures from one country
to another, which was accomplished by violence and thus brought about
a temporary reduction of the cost of production of precious metals
in a certain country by the simple process of plunder, affects just
as little the intrinsic laws of money circulation, as the gratuitous
distribution of Egyptian and Sicilian grain in Rome affected the
universal law governing the price of grain. Hume, as well as all
other writers of the eighteenth century, was not in possession of the
material necessary for the detailed observation of the circulation
of money. This material, which first becomes available with the full
development of banking, includes in the first place a critical history
of prices of commodities, and in the second, official and current
statistics relating to the expansion and contraction of the circulating
medium, the imports and exports of the precious metals, etc. Hume’s
theory of circulation may be summed up in the following propositions:
1. The prices of commodities in a country are determined by the
quantity of money existing there (real or symbolic money); 2. The
money current in a country represents all the commodities to be found
there. In proportion “as there is more or less of this representation,”
i. e. of money, “there goes a greater or less quantity of the thing
represented to the same quantity of it”; 3. If commodities increase
in quantity, their price falls or the value of money rises. If money
increases in quantity, then, on the contrary, the price of commodities
rises and the value of money declines.[118]

“The dearness of everything,” says Hume, “from plenty of money, is a
disadvantage, which attends an established commerce, and sets bounds
to it in every country, by enabling the poorer states to undersell
the richer in all foreign markets.”[119] “Where coin is in greater
plenty; as a greater quantity of it is required to represent the same
quantity of goods; it can have no effect, either good or bad, taking
a nation within itself; any more than it would make an alteration on
a merchant’s books, if, instead of the Arabian method of notation,
which requires few characters, he should make use of the Roman, which
requires a great many. Nay, the greater quantity of money, like the
Roman characters, is rather inconvenient, and requires greater trouble
both to keep and transport it.”[120] In order to prove anything, Hume
should have shown that under a _given_ system of notation the quantity
of characters used does not depend on the magnitude of the numbers,
but that on the contrary, the magnitude of the numbers depends on
the quantity of the characters used. It is perfectly true that there
is no advantage in estimating or “counting” values of commodities
in depreciated gold and silver, and that is the reason why nations
have always found it more convenient with the growth of the value
of the commodities in circulation to count in silver in preference
to copper, and in gold rather than in silver. In proportion as the
nations became richer, they converted the less valuable metals into
subsidiary coin and the more valuable ones into money. Furthermore,
Hume forgets that in order to count values in gold and silver, it is
not necessary that either gold or silver should be “on hand.” Money of
account and the medium of circulation are identical with him and both
are “coin.” Hume concludes that a rise or fall of prices depends on
the quantity of money in circulation, because a change in the value
of the measure of value, i. e. of the precious metals which serve as
money of account, causes a rise or fall of prices and, consequently,
also a change in the amount of money in circulation, the rapidity of
the latter remaining the same. That not only the quantity of gold and
silver increased in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but that
the cost of their production had declined at the same time, Hume could
know from the closing up of the European mines. In the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries the prices of commodities increased in Europe
with the influx of the mass of American gold and silver; hence the
prices of commodities in every land are determined by the mass of
gold and silver to be found there. This was Hume’s first “necessary
consequence.”[121] In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries prices
had not risen uniformly with the increase of the quantity of precious
metals; more than half a century passed before _any_ change in
prices became perceptible, and even then it took a long time before
the exchange values of commodities came to be generally estimated
according to the depreciated value of gold and silver, i. e. before the
revolution affected the general price level. Hence, concludes Hume,
who, quite contrary to the principles of his philosophy, generalizes
indiscriminately from imperfectly observed facts, prices of commodities
or the value of money depend not on the total amount of money to be
found in the country, but rather on the quantity of gold and silver
which is actually in circulation; but in the long run all the gold
and silver in the country must be absorbed by circulation in the
form of coin.[122] It is clear that if gold and silver have a value
of their own, then, apart from all other laws of circulation, only a
definite quantity of gold and silver can circulate as the equivalent
of commodities of a given value. If, therefore, every quantity of gold
and silver which happens to be in a country must enter the sphere of
exchange of commodities as a medium of circulation without regard
to the total value of the commodities, then gold and silver have no
intrinsic value and are in fact no real commodities. That is Hume’s
third “necessary consequence.” He makes commodities enter the process
of circulation without price and gold and silver without value. That
is the reason why he never speaks of the value of commodities and of
gold, but only of their relative quantities. Locke had already said
that gold and silver had merely an imaginary or conventional value; the
first brutal expression of opposition to the assertion of the monetary
“system” that gold and silver alone have true value. That gold and
silver owe their character of money to the function they perform in
the social process of exchange is interpreted to the effect that they
owe their own value and therefore the magnitude of their value to a
social function.[123] Gold and silver are thus worthless things, which,
however, acquire a fictitious value within the sphere of circulation
_as representatives of commodities_. They are converted by the process
of circulation not into money, but into value. This value of theirs is
determined by the proportion between their own volume and that of the
commodities, since the two must balance each other. Thus, Hume makes
gold and silver enter the world of commodities as non-commodities;
but as soon as they appear in the form of coin, he turns them, on
the contrary, into mere commodities, which must be exchanged for
other commodities by simple barter. In that manner, if the world of
commodities consisted of but one commodity, say one million quarters
of grain, the idea would work itself out very simply; viz., one
quarter of grain would be exchanged for two ounces of gold if there
were altogether two million ounces of gold, and for twenty ounces of
gold, if there were a total of twenty million ounces, the price of the
commodity and the value of money rising or falling in inverse ratio to
the quantity of gold in existence.[124] But the world of commodities
consists of an endless variety of use-values, whose relative values are
by no means determined by their relative quantities. How, then, does
Hume conceive this exchange of the volume of commodities for the volume
of gold? He contents himself with the meaningless, hollow idea that
every commodity is exchanged as an aliquot part of the entire volume of
commodities for a corresponding aliquot part of the volume of gold. The
process of the movement of commodities due to the antagonism between
exchange value and use-value which commodities bear within themselves,
and which manifests itself in the circulation of money, becoming
crystallized in different forms of the latter, is thus done away with,
giving place to the imaginary mechanical equalization process between
the quantity of precious metals to be found in a country and the volume
of commodities existing there at the same time.

SIR JAMES STEUART opens his inquiry into the nature of coin and
money with an elaborate criticism of Hume and Montesquieu.[125] He
is really the first to ask this question: is the quantity of current
money determined by the prices of commodities, or are the prices of
commodities determined by the quantity of current money? Although his
analysis is obscured by his fantastic conception of the measure of
value, his vacillating view of exchange value and by reminiscences
of the mercantile system, he discovers the essential forms of money
and the general laws of the circulation of money, because he makes
no attempt at a mechanical separation of commodities from money, but
proceeds to develop its different functions from the different aspects
of the exchange of commodities. Money is used, he says, for two
principal purposes: for the payment of debts and for the purchase of
what one needs; the two together form “ready money demands.” The state
of trade and industry, the mode of living, the customary expenditures
of the people, taken all together regulate and determine the volume
of “ready money demands,” i. e. the number of “alienations.” In order
to effect this multitude of payments, a certain proportion of money
is required. This proportion may increase or decrease according to
circumstances, even while the number of alienations remains the same.
At any rate, the circulation of a country can absorb only a definite
quantity of money.[126] “It is the complicated operations of demand
and competition which determines the standard price of everything”;
the latter “does not in the least depend on the quantity of gold and
silver in the country.”[127] What then will become of the gold and
silver that is not required as coin? They are hoarded or used in the
manufacture of articles of luxury. If the quantity of gold and silver
fall below the level required for circulation, symbolic money or other
substitutes take its place. If a favorable rate of exchange brings
about a surplus of money in the country and cuts off at the same time
the demand for its shipment abroad, it will accumulate in strong-boxes,
where the “riches will remain without producing more effect than if
they had remained in the mine.”

The second law discovered by Steuart is that of the reflux of credit
circulation to its starting point. Finally, he works out the effects
which the disparity of the rates of interest in different countries
produces upon the international export and import of precious
metals. The last two points we mention here only for the sake of
completeness, since they have but a remote bearing on the subject of
our discussion.[128] Symbolic money or credit money―Steuart does not
as yet distinguish between the two forms of money―may take the place
of precious metals as a means of purchase or means of payment in the
sphere of home circulation, but never in the world market. Paper notes
are therefore “money of the society,” while gold and silver are “money
of the world.”[129]

It is characteristic of nations with an “historical” development, in
the sense in which the term is used by the historical school of law,
to keep forgetting their own history. Although the controversy as to
the relation of prices of commodities to the volume of the circulating
medium has been continually agitating Parliament for the last half a
century, and has precipitated in England thousands of pamphlets, large
and small, Steuart has remained even more of a “dead dog” than Spinoza
seemed to be to Moses Mendelson in Lessing’s time. Even the latest
writer on the history of “currency,” Maclaren, makes Adam Smith the
original author of Steuart’s theory, and Ricardo of Hume’s theory.[130]
While Ricardo elaborated Hume’s theory, Adam Smith registered the
results of Steuart’s investigations as dead facts. Adam Smith applied
the Scotch saying that “mony mickles mak a muckle” even to his
spiritual wealth, and therefore concealed with petty care the sources
to which he owed the little out of which he tried to make so much.
More than once he prefers to break off the point of the discussion,
whenever he feels that an attempt on his part clearly to formulate the
question would compel him to settle his accounts with his predecessors.
So in the case of the money theory. He tacitly adopts Steuart’s theory
when he says that the gold and silver existing in a country is partly
utilized as coin; partly accumulated in the form of reserve funds for
merchants in countries without banks, or of bank reserves in countries
with a credit currency; partly serves as a hoard for the settling of
international payments; partly is turned into articles of luxury. He
passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in
circulation, treating money quite wrongly as a mere commodity.[131]
His vulgarizer, the dull J. B. Say, whom the French have proclaimed
_prince de la science_―like Johann Christoph Gottsched, who proclaimed
his Schönaich a Homer and himself a Pietro Aretino to the _terror
principum and lux mundi_―has with great pomp raised this not altogether
innocent oversight of Adam Smith to a dogma.[132] It must be said,
however, that his hostile attitude to the illusions of the mercantile
system prevented Adam Smith from taking an objective view of the
phenomena of metallic circulation, while his views on credit money are
original and deep. As in the eighteenth century petrification theories
there is always felt the presence of an undercurrent which springs from
either a critical or apologetic attitude toward the biblical tradition
of the flood, so there is concealed behind all the money theories of
the eighteenth century a secret struggle with the monetary system, the
ghost which had stood guard over the cradle of bourgeois economy and
continued to throw its shadow over legislation.

In the nineteenth century, inquiries into the nature of money were not
prompted directly by phenomena of metallic circulation, but rather by
those of bank-note circulation. The former was touched upon only in
order to discover the laws governing the latter. The suspension of
specie payments by the Bank of England in 1797, the rise of prices of
many commodities which followed it, the fall of the mint price of gold
below its market price, the depreciation of bank-notes, especially
since 1809, furnished the direct practical occasion for a party
struggle in parliament and a theoretical tournament outside of it,
both conducted with like passion. The historical background for the
controversy was furnished by the history of paper money during the
eighteenth century: the fiasco of Law’s bank; the depreciation of the
provincial bank-notes of the English Colonies in North America from the
beginning to the middle of the eighteenth century which went hand in
hand with the increase in the number of tokens of value; further, the
Continental bills issued as legal tender by the American government
during the War of Independence; and finally, the experiment with the
French _assignats_ carried out on a still larger scale. Most of the
English writers of that period confound the circulation of bank-notes,
which is governed by quite different laws, with the circulation of
tokens of value or government legal tender paper money; and while they
claim to explain the phenomena of this legal tender circulation by the
laws of metallic circulation, they proceed, as a matter of fact, just
the opposite way, viz., deducting laws for the latter from phenomena
observed in connection with the former. We omit all the numerous
writers of the period of 1800-1809 and turn directly to RICARDO, both
because he embodies the views of his predecessors, which he formulates
with greater precision, and because the shape he gave to the theory of
money governs English bank legislation until this moment. Ricardo, like
his predecessors, confounds the circulation of bank-notes, or credit
money, with the circulation of mere tokens of value. The fact which
impresses him most is the depreciation of paper currency accompanied by
the rise of prices of commodities. What the American mines had been to
Hume, the paper-bill presses in Threadneedle street were to Ricardo,
and he himself expressly identifies the two factors at some place in
his works. His first writings, which dealt exclusively with the money
question belong to the time of the most violent controversy between
the Bank of England, which had on its side the ministers and the war
party, and its opponents about whom were centered the parliamentary
opposition, the Whigs and the Peace party. They appeared as immediate
forerunners of the famous Report of the Bullion Committee of 1810, in
which Ricardo’s views were adopted.[133] The singular circumstance,
that Ricardo and his adherents, who held money to be merely a token
of value, are called bullionists, is due not only to the name of that
committee, but also to the nature of their theory. In his work on
political economy, Ricardo repeated and developed further the same
views, but nowhere has he investigated the nature of money as such, as
he had done in the case of exchange value, profit, rent, etc.

To begin with, Ricardo determines the value of gold and silver, like
that of all other commodities, by the quantity of labor-time embodied
in them.[134] By means of them, as commodities of a given value, the
values of all other commodities are measured.[135] The volume of the
circulating medium in a country is determined by the value of the
unit of measure of money on the one hand, and by the sum total of
the exchange values of commodities, on the other. This quantity is
modified by economy in the method of payment.[136] Since the quantity
of money, of a given value, which can be absorbed by circulation,
is thus determined and since the value of money within the sphere of
circulation manifests itself only in its quantity, it follows that
mere tokens of value, if issued in proportions determined by the value
of money, may replace it in circulation, and in fact, “a currency is
in its most perfect state when it consists wholly of paper money, but
of paper money of an equal value with the gold which it professes
to represent.”[137] So far Ricardo determines the volume of the
circulating medium by the prices of commodities, assuming the value of
money to be given; money as a token of value means with him a token of
a definite quantity of gold and not a mere worthless representative of
commodities as was the case with Hume.

When Ricardo suddenly gets off the straight path of his presentation
and takes the very opposite view, he does so to turn his attention
to the international circulation of precious metals and thus brings
confusion into the problem by introducing considerations that are
foreign to the subject. Let us follow his own course of reasoning, and,
in order to remove everything that is artificial and incidental, let
us assume that the gold and silver mines are located in the interior
of the countries in which the precious metals circulate as money.
The only inference which follows from Ricardo’s reasoning as so far
developed, is that, the value of gold being given, the quantity of
money in circulation will be determined by the prices of commodities.
Thus, at a given moment, the quantity of gold in circulation in a
country is simply determined by the exchange value of the commodities
in circulation. Let us suppose now that the sum total of these exchange
values has declined either because there are less commodities produced
at the old exchange values, or because, in consequence of an increased
productivity of labor, the same quantity of commodities has a smaller
value. Or, we may assume on the contrary that the sum total of exchange
values has increased, either because the quantity of commodities
has increased while the cost of their production has remained the
same, or because the value of the same or of a smaller quantity of
commodities has risen in consequence of a diminished productivity of
labor. What becomes in either case of the _given_ quantity of metal
in circulation? If gold is money merely because it is current as a
medium of circulation; if it is compelled to remain in circulation
like government legal tender paper money (and that is what Ricardo has
in mind), then the quantity of money in circulation will rise above
the normal level, as determined by the exchange value of the metal,
in the former case, and fall below that level in the latter. Although
possessing a value of its own, gold will become in the former case
a token of a metal of lower exchange value than its own, and in the
latter, a token of a metal of higher value. In the former case it will
remain as a token of value less than its own, in the latter greater
than its own (again an abstract deduction from legal tender paper
money). In the former case it is the same as though commodities were
estimated in a metal of lower value than gold, in the latter, as though
they were estimated in a metal of higher value. In the former case,
prices of commodities would rise therefore, in the latter they would
fall. In either case the movement of prices, their rise or fall, would
appear as the effect of a relative expansion or contraction of the
volume of gold in circulation above or below the level corresponding
to its own value, i. e. above or below the normal quantity which is
determined by the proportion between its own value and that of the
commodities in circulation.

The same process would take place if the sum total of the prices of
the commodities in circulation remained unchanged, while the volume
of gold in circulation came to be below or above the right level: the
former in case the gold coin worn out in the course of circulation
were not replaced by the production of a corresponding quantity of
gold in the mines; the latter, if the output of the mines exceeded the
requirements of circulation. In either case it is assumed that the cost
of production of gold or its value remain the same.

To sum up: the money in circulation is at its normal level, when its
volume is determined by its own bullion value, the exchange value of
commodities being given. It rises above that level, bringing about a
fall in the value of gold below its own bullion value and a rise of
prices of commodities, whenever the sum total of the exchange values of
commodities declines, or the output of gold from the mines increases.
It sinks below its right level, leading to a rise of gold above its
own bullion value and to a fall of prices of commodities, whenever the
sum total of the exchange values of the commodities or the gold output
of the mines is not sufficient to replace the quantity of outworn
gold. In either case the gold in circulation becomes a token of value
greater or smaller than that it really possesses. It may become an
appreciated or depreciated token of itself. As soon as all commodities
would come to be estimated in gold of this new value and the general
price level would accordingly rise or fall, the quantity of current
gold would again answer the requirements of circulation (a consequence
which Ricardo emphasizes with great pleasure), but would be at variance
with the cost of production of the precious metals and, therefore,
with their relation as commodities to all other commodities. According
to the general Ricardian theory of exchange value, the rise of gold
above its exchange value, i. e., above the value as determined by the
labor-time contained in it, would cause an increase in the production
of gold until the increased output of it would reduce its value to
the proper magnitude. And in the same manner, a fall of gold below
its value would cause a decline in its production until its value
rose again to its proper magnitude. By these opposite movements the
discrepancy between the bullion value of gold and its value as a medium
of circulation would disappear, the normal level of the volume of gold
in circulation would be restored, and the price level would again
correspond to the measure of value. These fluctuations in the value of
gold in circulation would to the same extent affect gold in the form
of bullion, because by assumption, all gold that is not utilized as an
article of luxury, is supposed to be in circulation. Since gold itself
may become, both as coin and bullion, a token of value of greater
or smaller magnitude than its bullion value, it is self understood
that convertible bank-notes in circulation have to share the same
fate. Although bank-notes are convertible, i. e. their real value and
nominal value agree, “the aggregate currency consisting of metal and of
convertible notes” may appreciate or depreciate according as to whether
it rises or falls, for reasons already stated, above or below the level
determined by the exchange value of the commodities in circulation
and the bullion value of gold. Inconvertible paper money, has, from
this point of view, only that advantage as against convertible paper
money, that it may depreciate in a twofold manner. It may fall below
the value of the metal which it is supposed to represent, because it
has been issued in too great quantity, or it may depreciate because
the metal it represents has itself fallen in value. This depreciation,
not of paper as compared with gold, but of gold and paper together,
or of the aggregate currency of a country, is one of the principal
discoveries of Ricardo, which Lord Overstone and Co. pressed into their
service and made a fundamental principle of Sir Robert Peele’s Bank
legislation of 1844 and 1845.

What should have been proven was that the price of commodities or the
value of gold depends on the quantity of gold in circulation. The
proof consists in the assumption of what is to be proven, viz. that
any quantity of the precious metal employed as money must become a
medium of circulation or coin, and thereby a token of value for the
commodities in circulation, no matter in what proportion to its own
intrinsic value and no matter what the total value of those commodities
may be. To put it differently, the proof consists in overlooking all
the other functions which money performs besides its function of a
medium of circulation. When hard pressed, as in his controversy with
Bosanquet, Ricardo, completely under the influence of the phenomenon of
depreciated tokens of value caused by their quality, takes recourse to
dogmatic assurances.[138]

If Ricardo had built up this theory by abstract reasoning, as we
have done it here, without introducing concrete facts and incidental
matters which only distract his attention from the main question, its
hollowness would be striking. But he takes up the entire subject in its
_international_ aspect. It will be easy to prove, however, that the
apparent magnitude of scale does not make his fundamental ideas less
diminutive.

His first proposition was as follows: the volume of metallic currency
is normal when it is determined by the total value of the commodities
in circulation estimated in its bullion value. Expressed so as to
apply to international conditions, it reads thus: in a normal state of
circulation every country possesses a quantity of money “according to
the state of its commerce and wealth.” Money circulates at a value
corresponding to its real value or to its cost of production, i. e.
it has the same value _in all countries_.[139] That being the case,
“there could be no temptation offered to either for their importation
or exportation.”[140] There would thus be established a balance of
currencies between the different countries. The normal level of a
national currency is now expressed in terms of an international
balance of currencies, which practically amounts to the statement that
nationality does not change anything in a universal economic law. We
have reached again the same fatal point as before. How is the normal
level disturbed? Or, speaking in terms of the new terminology, how is
the international balance of currencies disturbed? Or, how does money
cease to have the same value in all countries? Or, finally, how does
it cease to pass at its own value in every country? We have seen that
the normal level was disturbed by an increase or decrease of the volume
of money in circulation while the total value of commodities remained
the same; or, because the quantity of money in circulation remained
the same while the exchange values of commodities rose or fell. In the
same manner, the international level, determined by the value of the
metal itself, is disturbed by an increase in the quantity of gold in a
country brought about by the discovery of new gold mines,[141] or by
an increase or decrease of the total exchange-value of the circulating
commodities in any particular country. Just as in the former case the
output of the precious metals decreased or increased according as
to whether it was necessary to contract or expand the currency and
thereby to lower or raise prices, so are the same effects produced
now by export and import from one country to another. In the country
in which prices would rise or the value of gold would fall below the
bullion value in consequence of a redundant currency, gold would be
depreciated, and the prices of commodities would rise as compared with
other countries. Gold would, therefore, be exported, while commodities
would be imported, and vice versa. Just as in the former case the
output of gold, so now the import or export of gold and, with it, the
rise or fall of prices of commodities would continue until, as we would
have said before, the right value relation would be restored between
the metal and commodities, or as we shall say now, the international
balance of currencies would be restored. Just as in the former case
the production of gold increased or decreased because gold stood
above or below its value, so now the international migration of gold
would take place for the same reason. Just as in the former case,
every change in the production of the circulating metal affected its
quantity and, thereby, prices, so would the same effect be produced
now by international import and export. As soon as the relative values
of gold and commodities or the normal quantity of currency would be
restored, no further production would take place in the former case,
and no further export or import in the latter, except in so far as
would be necessary to replace outworn coin and to meet the demand of
manufacturers of articles of luxury. It follows “that the temptation to
export money in exchange for goods, or what is termed an unfavorable
balance of trade, never arises but from a redundant currency.”[142]
“The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not
the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance.”[143] Since the
increase or decrease in the production of gold in the former case and
the importation or exportation of gold in the latter, take place only
whenever its volume rises above or sinks below its normal level, i.
e. whenever gold appreciates or depreciates in comparison with its
bullion value, or whenever prices of commodities are too high or too
low; it follows that every such movement works as a corrective,[144]
since, through the resultant expansion or contraction of the currency,
prices are restored to their true level: in the former case this level
represents the balance between the respective values of gold and of
commodities; in the latter, the international balance of currencies. To
put it in other words: money circulates in different countries only in
so far as it circulates as coin in every country. Money is but coin and
all the gold existing in a country must therefore enter circulation,
i. e. it can rise above or fall below its value as a token of value.
Thus we safely land again, by the round-about way of this international
complication, at the simple dogma which constituted our starting point.

With what violence to actual facts Ricardo has to explain them in
the sense of his abstract theory, a few illustrations will suffice
to show. He maintains, e. g. that in years of poor crops, which
happened frequently in England during 1800-1820, gold is exported not
because corn is needed and gold as money is at all times an effectual
means of purchase in the world market, but because gold is in such
cases depreciated in its value as compared with other commodities
and, therefore, the currency of the country in which there has been
a failure of crops is depreciated with respect to other national
currencies. “In consequence of a bad harvest, a country having been
deprived of a part of its commodities ... the currency which was
before at its just level ... become(s) redundant,” and prices of all
commodities rise in consequence.[145] Contrary to this paradoxical
interpretation it has been proven statistically that from 1793 to
the present time, whenever England had a bad harvest the available
supply of currency not only did not become superabundant, but became
inadequate and that, therefore, more money circulated and had to
circulate on such occasions.[146]

In the same manner, Ricardo maintained, with reference to Napoleon’s
Continental System and the English Blockade Decree, that the English
exported gold instead of commodities to the Continent, because their
money was depreciated with respect to the money on the Continent, that
their commodities were, therefore, more high priced, which made it
a more profitable commercial speculation to export gold than goods.
According to him England was a market in which commodities were dear
and money was cheap, while on the Continent commodities were cheap
and money was dear. The trouble, according to an English writer, was
“the ruinously low prices of our manufactures and of our colonial
productions under the operation ... of the ‘Continental System’ during
the last six years of the war.... The prices of sugar and coffee,
for instance, on the Continent, computed in gold, were four or five
times higher than their prices in England, computed in bank-notes. I
am speaking ... of the times in which the French chemists discovered
sugar in beet-root, and a substitute for coffee in chicory; and when
the English grazier tried experiments upon fattening oxen with treacle
and molasses―of the times when we took possession of the island of
Heligoland, in order to form there a depot of goods to facilitate, if
possible, the smuggling of them into the north of Europe; and when
the lighter descriptions of British manufactures found their way into
Germany through Turkey.... Almost all the merchandise of the world
accumulated in our warehouses, where they became impounded, except when
some small quantity was released by a French License, for which the
merchants at Hamburgh and Amsterdam had, perhaps, given Napoleon such
a sum as forty or fifty thousand pounds. They must have been strange
merchants ... to have paid so large a sum for liberty to carry a cargo
of goods from a dear market to a cheap one. What was the ostensible
alternative the merchant had?... Either to buy coffee at 6d. a pound
in bank-notes, and send it to a place where it would instantly sell at
3s. or 4s. a pound in gold, or to buy gold with bank-notes at £5 an
ounce, and send it to a place where it would be received at £3 17s.
10-1/2d. an ounce.... It is too absurd, of course, to say ... that the
gold was remitted instead of the coffee, as a preferable mercantile
operation.... There was not a country in the world in which so large a
quantity of desirable goods could be obtained, in return for an ounce
of gold, as in England.... Bonaparte ... was constantly examining the
English Price Current.... So long as he saw that gold was dear and
coffee was cheap in England, he was satisfied that his ‘Continental
System’ worked well.”[147]

At the very time when Ricardo first formulated his theory of money,
and the Bullion Committee embodied it in its parliamentary report,
namely in 1810, a ruinous fall of prices of all English commodities
as compared with those of 1808 and 1809 took place, while gold rose
in value accordingly. Only agricultural products formed an exception,
because their importation from abroad met with obstacles and their
domestic supply was decimated by unfavorable crop conditions.[148]
Ricardo so utterly failed to comprehend the rôle of precious metals as
an international means of payment, that in his testimony before the
Committee of the House of Lords in 1819 he could say “that drains for
exportation would cease altogether so soon as cash payments should be
resumed, and the currency be restored to its metallic level.” He died
just in time, on the very eve of the crisis of 1825, which belied his
prophesies.

The time when Ricardo wrote was generally little adapted for the
observation of the function of precious metals as world money. Before
the introduction of the Continental System, the balance of trade
had almost always been in favor of England, and while that system
lasted, the commercial intercourse with the European continent was
too insignificant to affect the English rate of exchange. The money
transmissions were mostly of a political nature and Ricardo seems to
have utterly failed to grasp the part which subsidy payments played at
that time in English gold exports.[149]

Among the contemporaries of Ricardo who formed the school which
adopted his economic principles, JAMES MILL was the most important
one. He attempted to work out Ricardo’s theory of money on the basis
of simple metallic circulation, without the irrelevant international
complications which served Ricardo to hide the inadequacy of his
theory, and without any controversial regard for the operations of the
Bank of England. His main arguments are as follows:

“By value of money, is here to be understood the proportion in which
it exchanges for other commodities, or the quantity of it which
exchanges for a certain quantity of other things.... It is the total
quantity of the money in any country, which determines what portion of
that quantity shall exchange for a certain portion of the goods or
commodities of that country. If we suppose that all the goods of the
country are on one side, all the money on the other, and that they are
exchanged at once against one another, it is evident ... that the value
of money would depend wholly upon the quantity of it. It will appear
that the case is precisely the same in the actual state of the facts.
The whole of the goods of a country are not exchanged at once against
the whole of the money; the goods are exchanged in portions, often
in very small portions, and at different times, during the course of
the whole year. The same piece of money which is paid in one exchange
to-day, may be paid in another exchange tomorrow. Some of the pieces
will be employed in a great many exchanges, some in very few, and
some, which happen to be hoarded, in none at all. There will, amid all
these varieties, be a certain average number of exchanges, the same
which, if all the pieces had performed an equal number, would have been
performed by each; that average we may suppose to be any number we
please; say, for example, ten. If each of the pieces of the money in
the country perform ten purchases, that is exactly the same thing as if
all the pieces were multiplied by ten, and performed only one purchase
each. The value of all the goods in the country is equal to ten times
the value of all the money.... If the quantity of money instead of
performing ten exchanges in the year, were ten times as great, and
performed only one exchange in the year, it is evident that whatever
addition were made to the whole quantity, would produce a proportional
diminution of value, in each of the minor quantities taken separately.
As the quantity of goods, against which the money is all exchanged at
once, is supposed to be the same, the value of all the money is no
more, after the quantity is augmented, than before it was augmented.
If it is supposed to be augmented one-tenth, the value of every part,
that of an ounce for example, must be diminished one-tenth.... In
whatever degree, therefore, the quantity of money is increased or
diminished, other things remaining the same, in that same proportion,
the value of the whole, and of every part, is reciprocally diminished
or increased. This, it is evident, is a proposition universally true.
Whenever the value of money has either risen or fallen (the quantity
of goods against which it is exchanged and the rapidity of circulation
remaining the same), the change must be owing to a corresponding
diminution or increase of the quantity; and can be owing to nothing
else. If the quantity of goods diminish, while the quantity of money
remains the same, it is the same thing as if the quantity of money
had been increased;” and vice versa.... “Similar changes are produced
by any alteration in the rapidity of circulation.... An increase in
the number of these purchases has the same effect as an increase in
the quantity of money; a diminution the reverse.... If there is any
portion of the annual produce which is not exchanged at all, as what
is consumed by the producer; or which is not exchanged for money;
that is not taken into the account, because what is not exchanged for
money is in the same state with respect to the money, as if it did not
exist.... Whenever the coining of money ... is free, its quantity is
regulated by the value of the metal.... Gold and silver are in reality
commodities.... It is cost of production ... which determines the value
of these, as of other ordinary productions.”[150]

The whole wisdom of Mill resolves itself into a series of arbitrary and
absurd assumptions. He wishes to prove that the price of commodities or
the value of money is determined by “the total quantity of the money
in any country.” _Assuming_ that the quantity and the exchange value
of the commodities in circulation remain unchanged and that the same
be true of the rapidity of circulation and of the value of precious
metals as determined by the cost of production, and _assuming_ at
the same time that the quantity of the metallic currency increases
or decreases in proportion to the quantity of money _existing_ in a
country, it becomes really “evident” that what was to have been proven
has been assumed. Mill falls, moreover, into the same error as Hume
by assuming that use-values and not commodities with a given exchange
value are in circulation, and that vitiates his statement, even if we
grant all of his “assumptions.” The rapidity of circulation may remain
the same; this may also be true of the value of the precious metals
and of the _quantity_ of commodities in circulation; and yet a change
in the exchange value of the latter may require now a larger and now
a smaller quantity of money for their circulation. Mill sees that a
part of the money in a country is in circulation, while another is
idle. With the aid of a most absurd average calculation he _assumes_
that, although it really appears to be different, yet all the gold in
a country does circulate. Assuming that ten million silver thalers
circulate in a country twice a year, there could be twenty million such
coins in circulation, if each circulated but once. And if the entire
quantity of silver to be found in a country in any form amounts to
one hundred million thalers, it may be supposed that the entire one
hundred million can enter circulation, if each piece of money should
circulate once in five years. One could as well assume that all the
money of the world circulate in Hempstead, but that each piece of
money instead of being employed three times a year, is employed once
in 3,000,000 years. The one assumption is as relevant as the other for
the purpose of determining the relation between the sum total of prices
of commodities and the volume of currency. Mill feels that it is a
matter of decisive importance to him to bring the commodities in direct
contact not with the money in circulation, but with the entire supply
of money existing in a country. He admits that “the whole of the goods
of a country are not exchanged at once against the whole of the money,”
but that the goods are exchanged in different portions and at different
times of the year for different portions of money. To do away with this
difficulty he _assumes_ that it does not exist. Moreover, this entire
idea of direct contact of commodities and money and direct exchange is
a mere abstraction from the movement of simple purchase and sale or
the function of money as a means of purchase. Already in the movement
of money as a means of payment, commodity and money cease to appear
simultaneously.

The commercial crises of the nineteenth century, namely, the great
crises of 1825 and 1836, did not result in any new developments in
the Ricardian theory of money, but they did furnish new applications
for it. They were no longer isolated economic phenomena, such as the
depreciation of the precious metals in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries which interested Hume, or the depreciation of paper money
in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries which confronted
Ricardo; they were the great storms of the world market in which the
conflict of all the elements of the capitalist process of production
discharge themselves, and whose origin and remedy were sought in the
most superficial and abstract sphere of this process, the sphere of
money circulation. The theoretical assumption from which the school
of economic weather prophets proceeds, comes down in the end to the
illusion that Ricardo discovered the laws governing the circulation of
purely metallic currency. The only thing that remained for them to do
was to subject to the same laws the circulation of credit and bank-note
currency.

The most general and most palpable phenomenon in commercial crises is
the sudden, general decline of prices following a prolonged general
rise. The general decline of prices of commodities may be expressed as
a rise in the relative value of money with respect to all commodities,
and the general rise of prices as a decline of the relative value
of money. In either expression the phenomenon is described but not
explained. Whether I put the question thus: explain the general
periodic rise of prices followed by a general decline of the same, or
formulate the same problem by saying: explain the periodic decline and
rise of the relative value of money with respect to commodities; the
different wording leaves the problem as little changed as would its
translation from German into English. Ricardo’s theory of money was
exceedingly convenient, because it lends a tautology the semblance of
a statement of causal connection. Whence comes the periodic general
fall of prices? From the periodic rise of the relative value of
money. Whence the general periodic rise of prices? From the periodic
decline of the relative value of money. It might have been stated
with equal truth that the periodic rise and fall of prices is due
to their periodic rise and fall. The problem itself is stated under
the assumption that the intrinsic value of money, i. e., its value
as determined by the cost of production of precious metals remains
_unchanged_. If it is more than a tautology then it is based on a
misconception of the most elementary principles. If the exchange value
of A measured in terms of B, declines, we know that this may be caused
by a decline of the value of A as much as by a rise of the value of
B; the same being true of the case of a rise of the exchange value of
A measured in terms of B. The tautology once admitted as a statement
of cause, the rest follows easily. A rise of prices of commodities is
caused by a decline of the value of money and a decline of the value
of money is caused, as we know from Ricardo, by a redundant currency,
i. e., by a rise of the volume of currency over the level determined
by its own intrinsic value and the intrinsic value of the commodities.
In the same manner, the general decline of prices of commodities is
explained by the rise of the value of money above its intrinsic value
in consequence of an inadequate currency. Thus, prices rise and fall
periodically, because there is periodically too much or too little
money in circulation. Should a rise of prices happen to coincide
with a contracted currency, and a fall of prices with an expanded
one, it may be asserted in spite of those facts that in consequence
of a contraction or expansion of the volume of commodities in the
market, which can not be proven statistically, the quantity of money
in circulation has, although not absolutely, yet relatively increased
or declined. We have seen that according to Ricardo these universal
fluctuations must take place even with a purely metallic currency, but
that they balance each other through their alternations; thus, e. g.,
an inadequate currency causes a fall of prices, the fall of prices
leads to the export of commodities abroad, this export causes again an
import of gold from abroad, which, in its turn, brings about a rise
of prices; the opposite movement taking place in case of a redundant
currency, when commodities are imported and money is exported. But,
since in spite of these universal fluctuations of prices which are in
perfect accord with Ricardo’s theory of metallic currency, their acute
and violent form, their crisis-form, belongs to the period of advanced
credit, it is perfectly clear that the issue of bank-notes is not
exactly regulated by the laws of metallic currency. Metallic currency
has its remedy in the import and export of precious metals which
immediately enter circulation and thus, by their influx or efflux,
cause the prices of commodities to fall or rise. The same effect on
prices must now be exerted by banks by the artificial imitation of the
laws of metallic currency. If gold is coming in from abroad it proves
that the currency is inadequate, that the value of money is too high
and the prices of commodities too low, and, consequently, that bank
notes must be put in circulation in proportion to the newly imported
gold. On the contrary, notes have to be withdrawn from circulation in
proportion to the export of gold from the country. That is to say,
the issue of bank notes must be regulated by the import and export
of the precious metals or by the rate of exchange. Ricardo’s false
assumption that gold is only coin, and that therefore all imported gold
swells the currency, causing prices to rise, while all exported gold
reduces the currency leading to a fall of prices, this theoretical
assumption is turned into a practical experiment of putting in every
case an amount of currency in circulation equal to the amount of gold
in existence. Lord Overstone (the banker Jones Loyd), Colonel Torrens,
Norman, Clay, Arbuthnot and a host of other writers, known in England
as the adherents of the “currency principle,” not only preached this
doctrine, but with the aid of Sir Robert Peel succeeded in 1844 and
1845 in making it the basis of the present English and Scotch bank
legislation. Its ignominous failure, theoretical as well as practical,
following upon experiments on the largest national scale, can be
treated only after we take up the theory of credit.[151] So much can be
seen, however, that the theory of Ricardo which isolates money in its
fluent form of currency, ends by ascribing to the ebbs and tides in the
supply of precious metals an influence on bourgeois economy such as the
believers in the superstitions of the monetary system had never dreamt
of. Thus did Ricardo, who proclaimed paper currency as the most perfect
form of money, become the prophet of the bullionists.

After Hume’s theory or the abstract opposition to the monetary system
was thus developed to its ultimate conclusions, Steuart’s concrete
conception of money was finally restored to its rights by THOMAS
TOOKE.[152] Tooke arrives at his principles not from any theory, but
by a conscientious analysis of the history of prices of commodities
from 1793 to 1856. In the first edition of his History of Prices which
appeared in 1823, Tooke is still under the complete influence of the
Ricardian theory, and vainly tries to reconcile it with actual facts.
His pamphlet “On the Currency,” which appeared after the crisis of
1825 might even be considered as the first consistent presentation
of the views which were later given the force of law by Overstone.
Continued studies in the history of prices forced him, however, to the
conclusion that the direct connection between prices and the volume of
currency, as it is pictured by the theory, is a mere illusion; that
the expansion and contraction of currency which takes place while the
value of the precious metals remains unchanged, is always the effect
but never the cause of price fluctuations; that the circulation of
money is in any event but a secondary movement; and that money assumes
quite different forms in the actual process of production in addition
to that of a circulating medium. His detailed investigations belong
to a sphere outside of that of simple metallic circulation and can be
discussed here as little as the investigations of WILSON and FULLARTON
which belong to the same class.[153] None of these writers takes a
one-sided view of money, but treat it in its various aspects; the
treatment, however, is mechanical, without an attempt to establish an
organic connection either between these various aspects themselves,
or between them and the combined system of economic categories. They
fall, therefore, into the error of confusing _money_ as distinguished
from _medium of circulation_ with _capital_ or even with commodity,
although they are forced elsewhere to differentiate it from both.[154]
When gold, e. g., is shipped abroad, it practically means that capital
is sent abroad, but the same thing takes place when iron, cotton,
grain, or any other commodity is exported. Both are capital and are
distinguished not as capital, but as money and commodity. The function
of gold as the international medium of exchange springs, therefore,
not from its being capital, but from its specific character of money.
Similarly, when gold, or bank notes in its place, circulate in the home
trade as means of payment, they constitute capital at the same time.
But they could not be replaced by capital in the form of commodities,
as has been demonstrated very palpably by crises, for instance. That
is to say, it is the fact that gold is distinguished from commodities
in its capacity of money and not in that of capital, that makes it the
means of payment. Even when capital is exported directly as capital,
as, e. g., when it is done for the purpose of lending abroad a certain
amount on interest, it depends on circumstances, whether it will be
exported in the form of commodities or in that of gold, and if in the
latter form, it is due to the specific destination of the precious
metals as distinguished from commodities to serve as money. In general,
these writers do not consider money in its abstract form, as it is
developed within the sphere of simple circulation of commodities,
and as it spontaneously grows out of the relation of the circulating
commodities. As a result, they constantly vacillate between the
abstract forms of money which distinguish it from commodity and those
forms of it beneath which are concealed concrete relations, such as
capital, revenue, etc.[155]




Introduction

to the

Critique of Political Economy.[156]


  1. PRODUCTION IN GENERAL.

The subject of our discussion is first of all _material_ production
by individuals as determined by society, naturally constitutes the
starting point. The individual and isolated hunter or fisher who forms
the starting point with Smith and Ricardo, belongs to the insipid
illusions of the eighteenth century. They are Robinsonades which do
not by any means represent, as students of the history of civilization
imagine, a reaction against over-refinement and a return to a
misunderstood natural life. They are no more based on such a naturalism
than is Rosseau’s “contrat social,” which makes naturally independent
individuals come in contact and have mutual intercourse by contract.
They are the fiction and only the aesthetic fiction of the small and
great Robinsonades. They are, moreover, the anticipation of “bourgeois
society,” which had been in course of development since the sixteenth
century and made gigantic strides towards maturity in the eighteenth.
In this society of free competition the individual appears free from
the bonds of nature, etc., which in former epochs of history made him
a part of a definite, limited human conglomeration. To the prophets of
the eighteenth century, on whose shoulders Smith and Ricardo are still
standing, this eighteenth century individual, constituting the joint
product of the dissolution of the feudal form of society and of the new
forces of production which had developed since the sixteenth century,
appears as an ideal whose existence belongs to the past; not as a
result of history, but as its starting point.

Since that individual appeared to be in conformity with nature and
[corresponded] to their conception of human nature, [he was regarded]
not as a product of history, but of nature. This illusion has been
characteristic of every new epoch in the past. Steuart, who, as an
aristocrat, stood more firmly on historical ground, contrary to
the spirit of the eighteenth century, escaped this simplicity of
view. The further back we go into history, the more the individual
and, therefore, the producing individual seems to depend on and
constitute a part of a larger whole: at first it is, quite naturally,
the family and the clan, which is but an enlarged family; later on,
it is the community growing up in its different forms out of the
clash and the amalgamation of clans. It is but in the eighteenth
century, in “bourgeois society,” that the different forms of social
union confront the individual as a mere means to his private ends,
as an outward necessity. But the period in which this view of the
isolated individual becomes prevalent, is the very one in which the
interrelations of society (general from this point of view) have
reached the highest state of development. Man is in the most literal
sense of the word a _zoon politikon_, not only a social animal, but
an animal which can develop into an individual only in society.
Production by isolated individuals outside of society―something which
might happen as an exception to a civilized man who by accident
got into the wilderness and already dynamically possessed within
himself the forces of society―is as great an absurdity as the idea
of the development of language without individuals living together
and talking to one another. We need not dwell on this any longer.
It would not be necessary to touch upon this point at all, were not
the vagary which had its justification and sense with the people of
the eighteenth century transplanted in all earnest into the field of
political economy by Bastiat, Carey, Proudhon and others. Proudhon
and others naturally find it very pleasant, when they do not know the
historical origin of a certain economic phenomenon, to give it a quasi
historico-philosopohical explanation by going into mythology. Adam or
Prometheus hit upon the scheme cut and dried, whereupon it was adopted,
etc. Nothing is more tediously dry than the dreaming _locus communis_.

Whenever we speak, therefore, of production, we always have in mind
production at a certain stage of social development, or production
by social individuals. Hence, it might seem that in order to speak
of production at all, we must either trace the historical process of
development through its various phases, or declare at the outset that
we are dealing with a certain historical period, as, e. g., with modern
capitalistic production which, as a matter of fact, constitutes the
subject proper of this work. But all stages of production have certain
landmarks in common, common purposes. _Production in general_ is an
abstraction, but it is a rational abstraction, in so far as it singles
out and fixes the common features, thereby saving us repetition. Yet
these general or common features discovered by comparison constitute
something very complex, whose constituent elements have different
destinations. Some of these elements belong to all epochs, others are
common to a few. Some of them are common to the most modern as well
as to the most ancient epochs. No production is conceivable without
them; but while even the most completely developed languages have
laws and conditions in common with the least developed ones, what
is characteristic of their development are the points of departure
from the general and common. The conditions which generally govern
production must be differentiated in order that the essential points
of difference be not lost sight of in view of the general uniformity
which is due to the fact that the subject, mankind, and the object,
nature, remain the same. The failure to remember this one fact is the
source of all the wisdom of modern economists who are trying to prove
the eternal nature and harmony of existing social conditions. Thus they
say, e. g., that no production is possible without some instrument of
production, let that instrument be only the hand; that none is possible
without past accumulated labor, even if that labor consist of mere
skill which has been accumulated and concentrated in the hand of the
savage by repeated exercise. Capital is, among other things, also an
instrument of production, also past impersonal labor. Hence capital is
a universal, eternal natural phenomenon; which is true if we disregard
the specific properties which turn an “instrument of production” and
“stored up labor” into capital. The entire history of production
appears to a man like Carey, e. g., as a malicious perversion on the
part of governments.

If there is no production in general, there is also no general
production. Production is always some special branch of production or
an aggregate, as, e. g., agriculture, stock raising, manufactures,
etc. But political economy is not technology. The connection between
the general destinations of production at a given stage of social
development and the particular forms of production, is to be developed
elsewhere (later on).

Finally, production is not only of a special kind. It is always a
certain body politic, a social personality that is engaged on a larger
or smaller aggregate of branches of production. The connection between
the real process and its scientific presentation also falls outside
of the scope of this treatise. [We must thus distinguish between]
production in general, special branches of production and production as
a whole.

It is the fashion with economists to open their works with a general
introduction, which is entitled “production” (see, e. g., John Stuart
Mill) and deals with the general “requisites of production.”

This general introductory part treats or is supposed to treat:

1. Of the conditions without which production is impossible, i. e.,
of the most essential conditions of production. As a matter of fact,
however, it dwindles down, as we shall see, to a few very simple
definitions, which flatten out into shallow tautologies;

2. Of conditions which further production more or less, as, e. g., Adam
Smith’s [discussion of] a progressive and stagnant state of society.

In order to give scientific value to what serves with him as a mere
summary, it would be necessary to study the _degree of productivity_ by
periods in the development of individual nations; such a study falls
outside of the scope of the present subject, and in so far as it does
belong here is to be brought out in connection with the discussion
of competition, accumulation, etc. The commonly accepted view of the
matter gives a general answer to the effect that an industrial nation
is at the height of its production at the moment when it reaches its
historical climax in all respects. Or, that certain races, climates,
natural conditions, such as distance from the sea, fertility of
the soil, etc., are more favorable to production than others. That
again comes down to the tautology that the facility of creating
wealth depends on the extent to which its elements are present both
subjectively and objectively. As a matter of fact a nation is at its
industrial height so long as its main object is not gain, but the
process of gaining. In that respect the Yankees stand above the English.

But all that is not what the economists are really after in the general
introductory part. Their object is rather to represent production
in contradistinction to distribution―see Mill, e. g.―as subject to
eternal laws independent of history, and then to substitute bourgeois
relations, in an underhand way, as immutable natural laws of society
_in abstracto_. This is the more or less conscious aim of the entire
proceeding. On the contrary, when it comes to distribution, mankind
is supposed to have indulged in all sorts of arbitrary action. Quite
apart from the fact that they violently break the ties which bind
production and distribution together, so much must be clear from the
outset: that, no matter how greatly the systems of distribution may
vary at different stages of society, it should be possible here, as
in the case of production, to discover the common features and to
confound and eliminate all historical differences in formulating
_general human_ laws. E. g., the slave, the serf, the wage-worker―all
receive a quantity of food, which enables them to exist as slave,
serf, and wage-worker. The conqueror, the official, the landlord, the
monk, or the levite, who respectively live on tribute, taxes, rent,
alms, and the tithe,―all receive [a part] of the social product which
is determined by laws different from those which determine the part
received by the slave, etc. The two main points which all economists
place under this head, are: first, property; second, the protection
of the latter by the administration of justice, police, etc. The
objections to these two points can be stated very briefly.

1. All production is appropriation of nature by the individual within
and through a definite form of society. In that sense it is a tautology
to say that property (appropriation) is a condition of production. But
it becomes ridiculous, when from that one jumps at once to a definite
form of property, e. g. private property (which implies, besides, as
a prerequisite the existence of an opposite form, viz. absence of
property). History points rather to common property (e. g. among the
Hindoos, Slavs, ancient Celts, etc.) as the primitive form, which still
plays an important part at a much later period as communal property.
The question as to whether wealth grows more rapidly under this or that
form of property, is not even raised here as yet. But that there can
be no such a thing as production, nor, consequently, society, where
property does not exist in any form, is a tautology. Appropriation
which does not appropriate is a _contradictio in subjecto_.

2. Protection of property, etc. Reduced to their real meaning, these
commonplaces express more than what their preachers know, namely, that
every form of production creates its own legal relations, forms of
government, etc. The crudity and the shortcomings of the conception
lie in the tendency to see but an accidental reflective connection in
what constitutes an organic union. The bourgeois economists have a
vague notion that it is better to carry on production under the modern
police, than it was, e. g. under club-law. They forget that club law
is also law, and that the right of the stronger continues to exist in
other forms even under their “government of law.”

When the social conditions corresponding to a certain stage of
production are in a state of formation or disappearance, disturbances
of production naturally arise, although differing in extent and effect.

To sum up: all the stages of production have certain destinations in
common, which we generalize in thought; but the so-called general
conditions of all production are nothing but abstract conceptions which
do not go to make up any real stage in the history of production.


  2. THE GENERAL RELATION OF PRODUCTION TO DISTRIBUTION, EXCHANGE, AND
       CONSUMPTION.

Before going into a further analysis of production, it is necessary
to look at the various divisions which economists put side by side
with it. The most shallow conception is as follows: By production, the
members of society appropriate (produce and shape) the products of
nature to human wants; distribution determines the proportion in which
the individual participates in this production; exchange brings him the
particular products into which he wishes to turn the quantity secured
by him through distribution; finally, through consumption the products
become objects of use and enjoyment, of individual appropriation.
Production yields goods adopted to our needs; distribution distributes
them according to social laws; exchange distributes further what has
already been distributed, according to individual wants; finally, in
consumption the product drops out of the social movement, becoming the
direct object of the individual want which it serves and satisfies in
use. Production thus appears as the starting point; consumption as the
final end; and distribution and exchange as the middle; the latter
has a double aspect, distribution being defined as a process carried
on by society, while exchange, as one proceeding from the individual.
In production the person is embodied in things, in [consumption[157]]
things are embodied in persons; in distribution, society assumes
the part of go-between of production and consumption in the form of
generally prevailing rules; in exchange this is accomplished by the
accidental make-up of the individual.

Distribution determines what proportion (quantity) of the products the
individual is to receive; exchange determines the products in which the
individual desires to receive his share allotted to him by distribution.

Production, distribution, exchange, and consumption thus form a
perfect connection, production standing for the general, distribution
and exchange for the special, and consumption for the individual, in
which all are joined together. To be sure this is a connection, but
it does not go very deep. Production is determined [according to the
economists] by universal natural laws, while distribution depends
on social chance: distribution can, therefore, have a more or less
stimulating effect on production: exchange lies between the two as a
formal (?) social movement, and the final act of consumption which is
considered not only as a final purpose, but also as a final aim, falls,
properly, outside of the scope of economics, except in so far as it
reacts on the starting point and causes the entire process to begin all
over again.

The opponents of the economists―whether economists themselves or
not―who reproach them with tearing apart, like barbarians, what is an
organic whole, either stand on common ground with them or are _below_
them. Nothing is more common than the charge that the economists
have been considering production as an end in itself, too much to
the exclusion of everything else. The same has been said with regard
to distribution. This accusation is itself based on the economic
conception that distribution exists side by side with production as
a self-contained, independent sphere. Or [they are accused] that the
various factors are not treated by them in their connection as a
whole. As though it were the text books that impress this separation
upon life and not life upon the text books; and the subject at issue
were a dialectic balancing of conceptions and not an analysis of real
conditions.

_a. Production is at the same time also consumption._ Twofold
consumption, subjective and objective. The individual who develops his
faculties in production, is also expending them, consuming them in the
act of production, just as procreation is in its way a consumption
of vital powers. In the second place, production is consumption of
means of production which are used and used up and partly (as e. g. in
burning) reduced to their natural elements. The same is true of the
consumption of raw materials which do not remain in their natural form
and state, being greatly absorbed in the process. The act of production
is, therefore, in all its aspects an act of consumption as well. But
this is admitted by economists. Production as directly identical with
consumption, consumption as directly coincident with production,
they call productive consumption. This identity of production
and consumption finds its expression in Spinoza’s proposition,
_Determinatio est negatio_. But this definition of productive
consumption is resorted to just for the purpose of distinguishing
between consumption as identical with production and consumption
proper, which is defined as its destructive counterpart. Let us then
consider consumption proper.

Consumption is directly also production, just as in nature the
consumption of the elements and of chemical matter constitutes
production of plants. It is clear, that in nutrition, e. g., which
is but one form of consumption, man produces his own body; but it is
equally true of every kind of consumption, which goes to produce the
human being in one way or another. [It is] consumptive production.
But, say the economists, this production which is identical with
consumption, is a second production resulting from the destruction
of the product of the first. In the first, the producer transforms
himself into things; in the second, things are transformed into human
beings. Consequently, this consumptive production―although constituting
a direct unity of production and consumption―differs essentially from
production proper. The direct unity in which production coincides with
consumption and consumption with production, does not interfere with
their direct duality.

Production is thus at the same time consumption, and consumption is at
the same time production. Each is directly its own counterpart. But
at the same time an intermediary movement goes on between the two.
Production furthers consumption by creating material for the latter
which otherwise would lack its object. But consumption in its turn
furthers production, by providing for the products the individual
for whom they are products. The product receives its last finishing
touches in consumption. A railroad on which no one rides, which is,
consequently not used up, not consumed, is but a potential railroad,
and not a real one. Without production, no consumption; but, on the
other hand, without consumption, no production; since production would
then be without a purpose. Consumption produces production in two ways.

In the first place, in that the product first becomes a real product
in consumption; e. g., a garment becomes a real garment only through
the act of being worn; a dwelling which is not inhabited, is really no
dwelling; consequently, a product as distinguished from a mere natural
object, proves to be such, first _becomes_ a product in consumption.
Consumption gives the product the finishing touch by annihilating it,
since a product is the [result] of production not only as the material
embodiment of activity, but also as a mere object for the active
subject.

In the second place, consumption produces production by creating the
necessity for new production, i. e. by providing the ideal, inward,
impelling cause which constitutes the prerequisite of production.
Consumption furnishes the impulse for production as well as its object,
which plays in production the part of its guiding aim. It is clear
that while production furnishes the material object of consumption,
consumption provides the ideal object of production, as its image,
its want, its impulse and its purpose. It furnishes the object of
production in its subjective form. No wants, no production. But
consumption reproduces the want.

In its turn, production:

First, furnishes consumption[158] with its material, its object.
Consumption without an object is no consumption, hence production works
in this direction by producing consumption.

Second. But it is not only the object that production provides for
consumption. It gives consumption its definite outline, its character,
its finish. Just as consumption gives the product its finishing touch
as a product, production puts the finishing touch on consumption. For
the object is not simply an object in general, but a definite object,
which is consumed in a certain definite manner prescribed in its turn
by production. Hunger is hunger; but the hunger that is satisfied with
cooked meat eaten with fork and knife is a different kind of hunger
from the one that devours raw meat with the aid of hands, nails, and
teeth. Not only the object of consumption, but also the manner of
consumption is produced by production; that is to say, consumption is
created by production not only objectively, but also subjectively.
Production thus creates the consumers.

Third. Production not only supplies the want with material, but
supplies the material with a want. When consumption emerges from its
first stage of natural crudeness and directness―and its continuation
in that state would in itself be the result of a production still
remaining in a state of natural crudeness―it is itself furthered by its
object as a moving spring. The want of it which consumption experiences
is created by its appreciation of the product. The object of art, as
well as any other product, creates an artistic and beauty-enjoying
public. Production thus produces not only an object for the individual,
but also an individual for the object.

Production thus produces consumption: first, by furnishing the latter
with material; second, by determining the manner of consumption;
third, by creating in consumers a want for its products as objects of
consumption. It thus produces the object, the manner, and the moving
spring of consumption. In the same manner, consumption [creates] the
_disposition_ of the producer by setting (?) him up as an aim and by
stimulating wants. The identity of consumption and production thus
appears to be a three fold one.

First, direct identity: production is consumption; consumption is
production. Consumptive production. Productive consumption. Economists
call both productive consumption, but make one distinction by calling
the former reproduction, and the latter productive consumption. All
inquiries into the former deal with productive and unproductive labor;
those into the latter treat of productive and unproductive consumption.

Second. Each appears as the means of the other and as being brought
about by the other, which is expressed as their mutual interdependence;
a relation, by virtue of which they appear as mutually connected and
indispensable, yet remaining outside of each other.

Production creates the material as the outward object of consumption;
consumption creates the want as the inward object, the purpose of
production. Without production, no consumption; without consumption, no
production; this maxim figures (?) in political economy in many forms.

Third. Production is not only directly consumption and consumption
directly production; nor is production merely a means of consumption
and consumption the purpose of production. In other words, not only
does each furnish the other with its object; production, the material
object of consumption; consumption, the ideal object of production. On
the contrary, either one is not only directly the other, not (?) only
a means of furthering the other, but while it is taking place, creates
the other as such for itself (?). Consumption completes the act of
production by giving the finishing touch to the product as such, by
destroying the latter, by breaking up its independent material form; by
bringing to a state of readiness, through the necessity of repetition,
the disposition to produce developed in the first act of production;
that is to say, it is not only the concluding act through which the
product becomes a product, but also [the one] through which the
producer becomes a producer. On the other hand, production produces
consumption, by determining the manner of consumption, and further, by
creating the incentive for consumption, the very ability to consume, in
the form of want. This latter identity mentioned under point 3, is much
discussed in political economy in connection with the treatment of the
relations of demand and supply, of objects and wants, of natural wants
and those created by society.

Hence, it is the simplest matter with a Hegelian to treat production
and consumption as identical. And this has been done not only by
socialist writers of fiction but even by economists, e. g. Say; the
latter maintained that if we consider a nation as a whole, or mankind
_in abstracto_―her production is at the same time her consumption.
Storch pointed out Say’s error by calling attention to the fact that
a nation does not entirely consume her product, but also creates
means of production, fixed capital, etc. To consider society as a
single individual is moreover a false mode of speculative reasoning.
With an individual, production and consumption appear as different
aspects of one act. The important point to be emphasized here is that
if production and consumption be considered as activities of one
individual or of separate individuals, they appear at any rate as
aspects of one process in which production forms the actual starting
point and is, therefore, the predominating factor. Consumption,
as a natural necessity, as a want, constitutes an internal factor
of productive activity, but the latter is the starting point of
realization and, therefore, its predominating factor, the act into
which the entire process resolves itself in the end. The individual
produces a certain article and turns again into himself by consuming
it; but he returns as a productive and a self-reproducing individual.
Consumption thus appears as a factor of production.

In society, however, the relation of the producer to his product,
as soon as it is completed, is an outward one, and the return of
the product to the individual depends on his relations to other
individuals. He does not take immediate possession of it. Nor does the
direct appropriation of the product constitute his purpose, when he
produces in society. Between the producer and the product distribution
steps in, which determines by social laws his share in the world of
products; that is to say, distribution steps in between production and
consumption.

Does distribution form an independent sphere standing side by side with
and outside of production?

_b. Production and Distribution._ In perusing the common treatises on
economics one can not help being struck with the fact that everything
is treated there twice; e. g., under distribution, there figure rent,
wages, interest, and profit; while under production we find land,
labor, and capital as agents of production. As regards capital, it
is at once clear that it is counted twice: first, as an agent of
production; second, as a source of income; as determining factors and
definite forms of distribution, interest and profit figure as such also
in production, since they are forms, in which capital increases and
grows, and are consequently factors of its own production. Interest and
profit, as forms of distribution, imply the existence of capital as
an agent of production. They are forms of distribution which have for
their prerequisite capital as an agent of production. They are also
forms of reproduction of capital.

In the same manner, wages is wage-labor when considered under another
head; the definite character which labor has in one case as an agent
of production, appears in the other as a form of distribution. If
labor were not fixed as wage-labor, its manner of participation in
distribution[159] would not appear as wages, as is the case e. g. under
slavery. Finally, rent―to take at once the most developed form of
distribution―by means of which landed property receives its share of
the products, implies the existence of large landed property (properly
speaking, agriculture on a large scale) as an agent of production,
and not simply land, no more than wages represents simply labor.
The relations and methods of distribution appear, therefore, merely
as the reverse sides of the agents of production. An individual who
participates in production as a wage laborer, receives his share of the
products, i. e. of the results of production, in the form of wages. The
subdivisions and organization of distribution are determined by the
subdivisions and organization of production. Distribution is itself a
product of production, not only in so far as the material goods are
concerned, since only the results of production can be distributed; but
also as regards its form, since the definite manner of participation
in production determines the particular form of distribution, the form
under which participation in distribution takes place. It is quite an
illusion to place land under production, rent under distribution, etc.

Economists, like Ricardo, who are accused above all of having paid
exclusive attention to production, define distribution, therefore,
as the exclusive subject of political economy, because they
instinctively[160] regard the forms of distribution as the clearest
forms in which the agents of production find expression in a given
society.

To the single individual distribution naturally appears as a law
established by society determining his position in the sphere of
production, within which he produces, and thus antedating production.
At the outset the individual has no capital, no landed property.
From his birth he is assigned to wage-labor by the social process of
distribution. But this very condition of being assigned to wage-labor
is the result of the existence of capital and landed property as
independent agents of production.

From the point of view of society as a whole, distribution seems to
antedate and to determine production in another way as well, as a
pre-economic fact, so to say. A conquering people divides the land
among the conquerors establishing thereby a certain division and
form of landed property and determining the character of production;
or, it turns the conquered people into slaves and thus makes slave
labor the basis of production. Or, a nation, by revolution, breaks up
large estates into small parcels of land and by this new distribution
imparts to production a new character. Or, legislation perpetuates
land ownership in large families or distributes labor as an hereditary
privilege and thus fixes it in castes.

In all of these cases, and they are all historic, it is not
distribution that seems to be organized and determined by production,
but on the contrary, production by distribution.

In the most shallow conception of distribution, the latter appears as
a distribution of products and to that extent as further removed from
and quasi-independent of production. But before distribution means
distribution of products, it is first, a distribution of the means of
production, and second, what is practically another wording of the
same fact, it is a distribution of the members of society among the
various kinds of production (the subjection of individuals to certain
conditions of production). The distribution of products is manifestly
a result of this distribution, which is bound up with the process of
production and determines the very organization of the latter. To
treat of production apart from the distribution which is comprised in
it, is plainly an idle abstraction. Conversely, we know the character
of the distribution of products the moment we are given the nature of
that other distribution which forms originally a factor of production.
Ricardo, who was concerned with the analysis of production as it is
organized in modern society and who was the economist of production
_par excellence_, for that very reason declares _not_ production
but distribution as the subject proper of modern economics. We have
here another evidence of the insipidity of the economists who treat
production as an eternal truth, and banish history to the domain of
distribution.

What relation to production this distribution, which has a determining
influence on production itself, assumes, is plainly a question which
falls within the province of production. Should it be maintained
that at least to the extent that production depends on a certain
distribution of the instruments of production, distribution in that
sense precedes production and constitutes its prerequisite; it may
be replied that production has in fact its prerequisite conditions,
which form factors of it. These may appear at first to have a natural
origin. By the very process of production they are changed from natural
to historical, and if they appear during one period as a natural
prerequisite of production, they formed at other periods its historical
result. Within the sphere of production itself they are undergoing a
constant change. E. g., the application of machinery produces a change
in the distribution of the instruments of production as well as in that
of products, and modern land ownership on a large scale is as much the
result of modern trade and modern industry, as that of the application
of the latter to agriculture.

All of these questions resolve themselves in the last instance to this:
How do general historical conditions affect production and what part
does it play at all in the course of history? It is evident that this
question can be taken up only in connection with the discussion and
analysis of production.

Yet in the trivial form in which these questions are raised above,
they can be answered just as briefly. In the case of all conquests
three ways lie open. The conquering people may impose its own methods
of production upon the conquered (e. g. the English in Ireland in the
nineteenth century, partly also in India); or, it may allow everything
to remain as it was contenting itself with tribute (e. g. the Turks
and the Romans); or, the two systems by mutually modifying each other
may result in something new, a synthesis (which partly resulted
from the Germanic conquests). In all of these conquests the method
of production, be it of the conquerors, the conquered, or the one
resulting from a combination of both, determines the nature of the new
distribution which comes into play. Although the latter appears now
as the prerequisite condition of the new period of production, it is
in itself but a product of production, not of production belonging to
history in general, but of production relating to a definite historical
period. The Mongols with their devastations in Russia e. g. acted
in accordance with their system of production, for which sufficient
pastures on large uninhabited stretches of country are the main
prerequisite. The Germanic barbarians, with whom agriculture carried
on with the aid of serfs was the traditional system of production and
who were accustomed to lonely life in the country, could introduce
the same conditions in the Roman provinces so much easier since the
concentration of landed property which had taken place there, died away
completely with the older systems of agriculture. There is a prevalent
tradition that in certain periods robbery constituted the only source
of living. But in order to be able to plunder, there must be something
to plunder, i. e. there must be production.[161] And even the method
of plunder is determined by the method of production. A stockjobbing
nation[162] e. g. can not be robbed in the same manner as a nation of
shepherds.

In the case of the slave the instrument of production is robbed
directly. But then the production of the country in whose interest he
is robbed, must be so organized as to admit of slave labor, or (as in
South America, etc.) a system of production must be introduced adapted
to slavery.

Laws may perpetuate an instrument of production, e. g. land, in certain
families. These laws assume an economic importance if large landed
property is in harmony with the system of production prevailing in
society, as is the case e. g. in England. In France agriculture had
been carried on on a small scale in spite of the large estates, and
the latter were, therefore, broken up by the Revolution. But how about
the legislative attempt to perpetuate the minute subdivision of the
land? In spite of these laws land ownership is concentrating again. The
effect of legislation on the maintenance of a system of distribution
and its resultant influence on production are to be determined
elsewhere.

_c. Exchange and Circulation._ Circulation is but a certain aspect
of exchange, or it may be defined as exchange considered as a whole.
Since _exchange_ is an intermediary factor between production and its
dependent, distribution, on the one hand, and consumption, on the
other; and since the latter appears but as a constituent of production,
exchange is manifestly also a constituent part of production.

In the first place, it is clear that the exchange of activities and
abilities which takes place in the sphere of production falls directly
within the latter and constitutes one of its essential elements. In
the second place, the same is true of the exchange of products, in
so far as it is a means of completing a certain product, designed
for immediate consumption. To that extent exchange constitutes an
act included in production. Thirdly, the so-called exchange between
dealers and dealers[163] is by virtue of its organization determined by
production, and is itself a species of productive activity. Exchange
appears to be independent of and indifferent to production only in the
last stage when products are exchanged directly for consumption. But
in the first place, there is no exchange without a division of labor,
whether natural or as a result of historical development; secondly,
private exchange implies the existence of private production; thirdly,
the intensity of exchange, as well as its extent and character are
determined by the degree of development and organization of production,
as e. g. exchange between city and country, exchange in the country, in
the city, etc. Exchange thus appears in all its aspects to be directly
included in or determined by production.

The result we arrive at is not that production, distribution, exchange,
and consumption are identical, but that they are all members of one
entity, different sides of one unit. Production predominates not only
over production itself in the opposite sense of that term, but over
the other elements as well. With it the process constantly starts over
again. That exchange and consumption can not be the predominating
elements is self evident. The same is true of distribution in the
narrow sense of distribution of products; as for distribution in the
sense of distribution of the agents of production, it is itself but a
factor of production. A definite [form of] production thus determines
the [forms of] consumption, distribution, exchange, and _also the
mutual relations between these various elements_. Of course, production
_in its one-sided form_ is in its turn influenced by other elements; e.
g. with the expansion of the market, i. e. of the sphere of exchange,
production grows in volume and is subdivided to a greater extent.

With a change in distribution, production undergoes a change; as
e. g. in the case of concentration of capital, of a change in the
distribution of population in city and country, etc. Finally, the
demands of consumption also influence production. A mutual interaction
takes place between the various elements. Such is the case with every
organic body.


  3. THE METHOD OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.

When we consider a given country from a politico-economic standpoint,
we begin with its population, then analyze the latter according to
its subdivision into classes, location in city, country, or by the
sea, occupation in different branches of production; then we study
its exports and imports, annual production and consumption, prices of
commodities, etc. It seems to be the correct procedure to commence
with the real and concrete aspect of conditions as they are; in the
case of political economy, to commence with population which is the
basis and the author of the entire productive activity of society.
Yet, on closer consideration it proves to be wrong. Population is an
abstraction, if we leave out e. g. the classes of which it consists.
These classes, again, are but an empty word, unless we know what are
the elements on which they are based, such as wage-labor, capital,
etc. Those imply, in their turn, exchange, division of labor, prices,
etc. Capital, e. g. does not mean anything without wage-labor, value,
money, price, etc. If we start out, therefore, with population, we do
so with a chaotic conception of the whole, and by closer analysis we
will gradually arrive at simpler ideas; thus we shall proceed from the
imaginary concrete to loss and less complex abstractions, until we
get at the simplest conception. This once attained, we might start
on our return journey until we would finally come back to population,
but this time not as a chaotic notion of an integral whole, but as a
rich aggregate of many conceptions and relations. The former method
is the one which political economy had adopted in the past at its
inception. The economists of the seventeenth century, e. g., always
started out with the living aggregate: population, nation, state,
several states, etc., but in the end they invariably arrived, by means
of analysis, at certain leading, abstract general principles, such
as division of labor, money, value, etc. As soon as these separate
elements had been more or less established by abstract reasoning,
there arose the systems of political economy which start from simple
conceptions, such as labor, division of labor, demand, exchange value,
and conclude with state, international exchange and world market. The
latter is manifestly the scientifically correct method. The concrete is
concrete, because it is a combination of many objects with different
destinations, i. e. a unity of diverse elements. In our thought, it
therefore appears as a process of synthesis, as a result, and not as a
starting point, although it is the real starting point and, therefore,
also the starting point of observation and conception. By the former
method the complete conception passes into an abstract definition; by
the latter, the abstract definitions lead to the reproduction of the
concrete subject in the course of reasoning. Hegel fell into the error,
therefore, of considering the real as the result of self-coordinating,
self-absorbed, and spontaneously operating thought, while the method of
advancing from the abstract to the concrete is but a way of thinking
by which the concrete is grasped and is reproduced in our mind as
a concrete. It is by no means, however, the process which itself
generates the concrete. The simplest economic category, say, exchange
value, implies the existence of population, population that is engaged
in production under certain conditions; it also implies the existence
of certain types of family, clan, or state, etc. It can have no other
existence except as an abstract one-sided relation of an already given
concrete and living aggregate.

As a category, however, exchange value leads an antediluvian existence.
And since our philosophic consciousness is so arranged that only the
image of the man that it conceives appears to it as the real man
and the world as it conceives it, as the real world; it mistakes
the movement of categories for the real act of production (which
unfortunately (?) receives only its impetus from outside) whose
result is the world; that is true―here we have, however, again a
tautology―in so far as the concrete aggregate is a thought aggregate,
in so far as the concrete subject of our thought is in fact a product
of thought, of comprehension; not, however, in the sense of a product
of a self-emanating conception which works outside of and stands
above observation and imagination, but of a mental consummation of
observation and imagination. The whole, as it appears in our heads as
a thought-aggregate, is the product of a thinking mind which grasps
the world in the only way open to it, a way which differs from the one
employed by the artistic, religious, or practical mind. The concrete
subject continues to lead an independent existence after it has been
grasped, as it did before, outside of the head, so long as the head
contemplates it only speculatively, theoretically. So that in the
employment of the theoretical method [in political economy], the
subject, society, must constantly be kept in mind as the premise from
which we start.

But have these simple categories no independent historical or natural
existence antedating the more concrete ones? _Ça depend._ For instance,
in his Philosophy of Law Hegel rightly starts out with possession,
as the simplest legal relation of individuals. But there is no such
thing as possession before the family or the relations of lord and
serf, which are a great deal more concrete relations, have come into
existence. On the other hand, one would be right in saying that there
are families and clans which only _possess_, but do not _own_ things.
The simpler category thus appears as a relation of simple family and
clan communities with respect to property. In earlier society the
category appears as a simple relation of a developed organism, but the
concrete substratum from which springs the relation of possession, is
always implied. One can imagine an isolated savage in possession of
things. But in that case possession is no legal relation. It is not
true that the family came as the result of the historical evolution of
possession. On the contrary, the latter always implies the existence
of this “more concrete category of law.” Yet so much may be said, that
the simple categories are the expression of relations in which the
less developed concrete entity may have been realized without entering
into the manifold relations and bearings which are mentally expressed
in the concrete category; but when the concrete entity attains fuller
development it will retain the same category as a subordinate relation.

Money may exist and actually had existed in history before capital, or
banks, or wage-labor came into existence. With that in mind, it may be
said that the more simple category can serve as an expression of the
predominant relations of an undeveloped whole or of the subordinate
relations of a more developed whole, [relations] which had historically
existed before the whole developed in the direction expressed in the
more concrete category. In so far, the laws of abstract reasoning which
ascends from the most simple to the complex, correspond to the actual
process of history.

On the other hand, it may be said that there are highly developed but
historically unripe forms of society in which the highest economic
forms are to be found, such as co-operation, advanced division of
labor, etc., and yet there is no money in existence, e. g. Peru.

In Slavic communities also, money, as well as exchange to which it
owes its existence, does not appear at all or very little within the
separate communities, but it appears on their boundaries in their
inter-communal traffic; in general, it is erroneous to consider
exchange as a constituent element originating within the community.
It appears at first more in the mutual relations between different
communities, than in those between the members of the same community.
Furthermore, although money begins to play its part everywhere at an
early stage, it plays in antiquity the part of a predominant element
only in one-sidedly developed nations, viz. trading nations, and even
in most cultured antiquity, in Greece and Rome, it attains its full
development, which constitutes the prerequisite of modern bourgeois
society, only in the period of their decay. Thus, this quite simple
category attained its culmination in the past only at the most advanced
stages of society. Even then it did not pervade (?) all economic
relations; in Rome e. g. at the time of its highest development taxes
and payments in kind remained the basis. As a matter of fact, the money
system was fully developed there only so far as the army was concerned;
it never came to dominate the entire system of labor.

Thus, although the simple category may have existed historically before
the more concrete one, it can attain its complete internal and external
development only in complex (?) forms of society, while the more
concrete category has reached its full development in a less advanced
form of society.

Labor is quite a simple category. The idea of labor in that sense, as
labor in general, is also very old. Yet, “labor” thus simply defined
by political economy is as much a modern category, as the conditions
which have given rise to this simple abstraction. The monetary system,
e. g. defines wealth quite objectively, as a thing (?)[164] in money.
Compared with this point of view, it was a great step forward, when
the industrial or commercial system came to see the source of wealth
not in the object but in the activity of persons, viz. in commercial
and industrial labor. But even the latter was thus considered only
in the limited sense of a money producing activity. The physiocratic
system [marks still further progress] in that it considers a certain
form of labor, viz. agriculture, as the source of wealth, and wealth
itself not in the disguise of money, but as a product in general, as
the general result of labor. But corresponding to the limitations of
the activity, this product is still only a natural product. Agriculture
is productive, land is the source of production _par excellence_. It
was a tremendous advance on the part of Adam Smith to throw aside all
limitations which mark wealth-producing activity and [to define it] as
labor in general, neither industrial, nor commercial, nor agricultural,
or one as much as the other. Along with the universal character of
wealth-creating activity we have now the universal character of the
object defined as wealth, viz. product in general, or labor in general,
but as past incorporated labor. How difficult and great was the
transition, is evident from the way Adam Smith himself falls back from
time to time into the physiocratic system. Now, it might seem as though
this amounted simply to finding an abstract expression for the simplest
relation into which men have been mutually entering as producers from
times of yore, no matter under what form of society. In one sense this
is true. In another it is not.

The indifference as to the particular kind of labor implies the
existence of a highly developed aggregate of different species of
concrete labor, none of which is any longer the predominant one. So
do the most general abstractions commonly arise only where there is
the highest concrete development, where one feature appears to be
jointly possessed by many, and to be common to all. Then it can not
be thought of any longer in one particular form. On the other hand,
this abstraction of labor is but the result of a concrete aggregate of
different kinds of labor. The indifference to the particular kind of
labor corresponds to a form of society in which individuals pass with
ease from one kind of work to another, which makes it immaterial to
them what particular kind of work may fall to their share. Labor has
become here, not only categorically but really, a means of creating
wealth in general and is no longer grown together with the individual
into one particular destination. This state of affairs has found its
highest development in the most modern of bourgeois societies, the
United States. It is only here that the abstraction of the category
“labor,” “labor in general,” labor _sans phrase_, the starting point
of modern political economy, becomes realized in practice. Thus,
the simplest abstraction which modern political economy sets up as
its starting point, and which expresses a relation dating back to
antiquity and prevalent under all forms of society, appears in this
abstraction truly realized only as a category of the most modern
society. It might be said that what appears in the United States as an
historical product,―viz. the indifference as to the particular kind of
labor―appears among the Russians e. g. as a natural disposition. But it
makes all the difference in the world whether barbarians have a natural
predisposition which makes them applicable alike to everything, or
whether civilized people apply themselves to everything. And, besides,
this indifference of the Russians as to the kind of work they do,
corresponds to their traditional practice of remaining in the rut of a
quite definite occupation until they are thrown out of it by external
influences.

This example of labor strikingly shows how even the most abstract
categories, in spite of their applicability to all epochs―just because
of their abstract character―are by the very definiteness of the
abstraction a product of historical conditions as well, and are fully
applicable only to and under those conditions.

The bourgeois society is the most highly developed and most highly
differentiated historical organization of production. The categories
which serve as the expression of its conditions and the comprehension
of its own organization enable it at the same time to gain an insight
into the organization and the conditions of production which had
prevailed under all the past forms of society, on the ruins and
constituent elements of which it has arisen, and of which it still
drags along some unsurmounted remnants, while what had formerly been
mere intimation has now developed to complete significance. The anatomy
of the human being is the key to the anatomy of the ape. But the
intimations of a higher animal in lower ones can be understood only if
the animal of the higher order is already known. The bourgeois economy
furnishes a key to ancient economy, etc. This is, however, by no means
true of the method of those economists who blot out all historical
differences and see the bourgeois form in all forms of society. One can
understand the nature of tribute, tithes, etc., after one has learned
the nature of rent. But they must not be considered identical.

Since, furthermore, bourgeois society is but a form resulting from
the development of antagonistic elements, some relations belonging
to earlier forms of society are frequently to be found in it but in
a crippled state or as a travesty of their former self, as e. g.
communal property. While it may be said, therefore, that the categories
of bourgeois economy contain what is true of all other forms of
society, the statement is to be taken _cum grano salis_. They may
contain these in a developed, or crippled, or caricatured form, but
always essentially different. The so-called historical development
amounts in the last analysis to this, that the last form considers its
predecessors as stages leading up to itself and perceives them always
one-sidedly, since it is very seldom and only under certain conditions
that it is capable of self-criticism; of course, we do not speak here
of such historical periods which appear to their own contemporaries as
periods of decay. The Christian religion became capable to assist us
to an objective view of past mythologies as soon as it was ready for
self-criticism to a certain extent, _dynamei_ so-to-say. In the same
way bourgeois political economy first came to understand the feudal,
the ancient, and the oriental societies as soon as the self-criticism
of the bourgeois society had commenced. So far as bourgeois political
economy has not gone into the mythology of purely (?) identifying the
bourgeois system with the past, its criticism of the feudal system
against which it still had to wage war resembled Christian criticism
of the heathen religions or Protestant criticism of Catholicism.

In the study of economic categories, as in the case of every historical
and social science, it must be borne in mind that as in reality so
in our mind the subject, in this case modern bourgeois society, is
given and that the categories are therefore but forms of expression,
manifestations of existence, and frequently but one-sided aspects of
this subject, this definite society; and that, therefore, the origin of
[political economy] _as a science_ does not by any means date from the
time to which it is referred _as such_. This is to be firmly held in
mind because it has an immediate and important bearing on the matter of
the subdivisions of the science.

For instance, nothing seems more natural than to start with rent, with
landed property, since it is bound up with land, the source of all
production and all existence, and with the first form of production in
all more or less settled communities, viz. agriculture. But nothing
would be more erroneous. Under all forms of society there is a certain
industry which predominates over all the rest and whose condition
therefore determines the rank and influence of all the rest.

It is the universal light with which all the other colors are tinged
and are modified through its peculiarity. It is a special ether which
determines the specific gravity of everything that appears in it.

Let us take for example pastoral nations (mere hunting and fishing
tribes are not as yet at the point from which real development
commences). They engage in a certain form of agriculture, sporadically.
The nature of land-ownership is determined thereby. It is held in
common and retains this form more or less according to the extent to
which these nations hold on to traditions; such e. g. is land-ownership
among the Slavs. Among nations whose agriculture is carried on by a
settled population―the settled state constituting a great advance―where
agriculture is the predominant industry, such as in ancient and feudal
societies, even the manufacturing industry and its organization, as
well as the forms of property which pertain to it, have more or less
the characteristic features of the prevailing system of land ownership;
[society] is then either entirely dependent upon agriculture, as in the
case of ancient Rome, or, as in the middle ages, it imitates in its
city relations the forms of organization prevailing in the country.
Even capital, with the exception of pure money capital, has, in the
form of the traditional working tool, the characteristics of land
ownership in the Middle Ages.

The reverse is true of bourgeois society. Agriculture comes to be more
and more merely a branch of industry and is completely dominated by
capital. The same is true of rent. In all the forms of society in which
land ownership is the prevalent form, the influence of the natural
element is the predominant one. In those where capital predominates the
prevailing element is the one historically created by society. Rent
can not be understood without capital, nor can capital, without rent.
Capital is the all dominating economic power of bourgeois society. It
must form the starting point as well as the end and be developed before
land-ownership is. After each has been considered separately, their
mutual relation must be analyzed.

It would thus be impractical and wrong to arrange the economic
categories in the order in which they were the determining factors in
the course of history. Their order of sequence is rather determined
by the relation which they bear to one another in modern bourgeois
society, and which is the exact opposite of what seems to be their
natural order or the order of their historical development. What we are
interested in is not the place which economic relations occupy in the
historical succession of different forms of society. Still less are we
interested in the order of their succession “in idea” (_Proudhon_),
which is but a hazy (?) conception of the course of history. We are
interested in their organic connection within modern bourgeois society.

The sharp line of demarkation (abstract precision) which so clearly
distinguished the trading nations of antiquity, such as the
Phenicians and the Carthagenians, was due to that very predominance
of agriculture. Capital as trading or money capital appears in that
abstraction, where capital does not constitute as yet the predominating
element of society. The Lombardians and the Jews occupied the same
position among the agricultural nations of the middle ages.

As a further illustration of the fact that the same category plays
different parts at different stages of society, we may mention the
following: one of the latest forms of bourgeois society, viz. stock
companies, appear also at its beginning in the form of the great
chartered monopolistic trading companies. The conception of national
wealth which is imperceptibly formed in the minds of the economists of
the seventeenth century, and which partly continues to be entertained
by those of the eighteenth century, is that wealth is produced solely
for the state, but that the power of the latter is proportional to that
wealth. It was as yet an unconsciously hypocritical way in which wealth
announced itself and its own production as the aim of modern states
considering the latter merely as a means to the production of wealth.

The order of treatment must manifestly be as follows: first, the
general abstract definitions which are more or less applicable to
all forms of society, but in the sense indicated above. Second, the
categories which go to make up the inner organization of bourgeois
society and constitute the foundations of the principal classes;
capital, wage-labor, landed property; their mutual relations; city and
country; the three great social classes, the exchange between them;
circulation, credit (private). Third, the organization of bourgeois
society in the form of a state, considered in relation to itself; the
“unproductive” classes; taxes; public debts; public credit; population;
colonies; emigration. Fourth, the international organization of
production; international division of labor; international exchange;
import and export; rate of exchange. Fifth, the world market and
crises.


  4. PRODUCTION, MEANS OF PRODUCTION, AND CONDITIONS OF PRODUCTION,
       THE RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.[165] THE CONNECTION
       BETWEEN FORM OF STATE AND PROPERTY ON THE ONE HAND AND RELATIONS
       OF PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION(1) ON THE OTHER. LEGAL RELATIONS.
       FAMILY RELATIONS.


Notes on the points to be mentioned here and not to be omitted:[166]

1. _War_ attains complete development before peace; how certain
economic phenomena, such as wage-labor, machinery, etc., are developed
at an earlier date through war and in armies than within bourgeois
society. The connection between productive force and the means of
communication is made especially plain in the case of the army.

2. The relation between the idealistic and realistic methods of writing
history; namely, the so-called history of civilization which is all a
history of religion and states.

In this connection something may be said of the different methods
hitherto employed in writing history. The so-called objective [method].
The subjective. (The moral and others). The philosophic.

3. _Secondary and tertiary._ Conditions of production which have been
taken over or transplanted; in general, those that are not original.
Here [is to be treated] the effect of international relations.

4. Objections to the materialistic character of this view. Its relation
to naturalistic materialism.

5. The dialectics of the conceptions productive force (means of
production) and relation of production, dialectics whose limits are to
be determined and which does not do away with the concrete difference.

6. The unequal relation between the development of material production
and art, for instance. In general, the conception of progress is not
to be taken in the sense of the usual abstraction. In the case of
art, etc., it is not so important and difficult to understand this
disproportion as in that of practical social relations, e. g. the
relation between education in the United States and Europe. The really
difficult point, however, that is to be discussed here is that of the
unequal (?) development of relations of production as legal relations.
As, e. g., the connection between Roman civil law (this is less true of
criminal and public law) and modern production.

7. This conception of development appears to imply necessity. On the
other hand, justification of accident. Varia. (Freedom and other
points). (The effect of means of communication). World history does not
always appear in history as the result of world history.

8. The starting point [is to be found] in certain facts of nature
embodied subjectively and objectively in clans, races, etc.

+4. Produktion, Produktions-mittel und Produktionsverhältnisse.
Produktionsverhältnis und Verkehrsverhältnisse. Staats- und
Eigenthumsformen im Verhältnis zu den Produktions- und
Verkehrsverhältnissen. Rechtsverhältnisse. Familienverhältnisse.+

Notabene in bezug auf Punkte, die hier zu erwähnen und nicht vergessen
werden dürfen:

‖1. Der =Krieg= ist früher ausgebildet, wie der Frieden:
[Auszuführen wäre] die Art, wie durch den Krieg und in den Armeen
etc. gewisse ökonomische Verhältnisse wie Lohnarbeit, Maschinerie
etc. früher entwickelt [werden] als im Inneren der bürgerlichen
Gesellschaft. Auch das Verhältnis von Produktivkraft und
Verkehrsverhältnissen wird besonders anschaulich in der Armee.

2. Verhältnis der bisherigen idealen Geschichtsschreibung zur realen.
Namentlich die sogenannte Kulturgeschichte, die alle Religions-und
Staatengeschichte.

Bei der Gelegenheit kann auch etwas gesagt werden über die
verschiedenen Arten der bisherigen Geschichtsschreibung. Sogenannte
objektive. Subjektive. (Moralische und andere.) Philosophische.

3. =Sekundäres und Tertiäres.= Ueberhaupt =abgeleitete,
übertragene,= nicht ursprüngliche Produktionsverhältnisse. Hier
[ist das] Einspielen der internationalen Verhältnisse [zu behandeln].

4. Vorwürfe über Materialismus dieser Auffassung. Verhältnis zum
naturalistischen Materialismus.

5. Dialektik der Begriffe Produktivkraft (Produktions-mittel) und
Produktionsverhältnis, eine Dialektik, deren Grenzen zu bestimmen sind
und den realen Unterschied nicht aufhebt.

6. Das unegale Verhältnis der Entwicklung der materiellen Produktion
zum Beispiel zur künstlerischen. Ueberhaupt ist der Begriff des
Fortschritts nicht in der gewöhnlichen Abstraktion zu fassen. Bei der
Kunst etc. ist diese Disproportion noch nicht so wichtig und schwierig
zu fassen als innerhalb praktisch-sozialer Verhältnisse selbst, zum
Beispiel das Bildungsverhältnis der Vereinigten Staaten zu Europa. Der
eigentlich schwierige Punkt, der hier zu erörtern ist aber der, wie
die Produktionsverhältnisse als Rechtsverhältnisse in ungleiche (?)
Entwicklung treten. Also zum Beispiel das Verhältnis des römischen
Privatrechts (im Kriminalrecht und öffentlichen ist das wenige der
Fall) zur modernen Produktion.

7. Diese Auffassung erscheint als nothwendige Entwicklung. Aber
Berechtigung des Zufalls. Varia.[167] (Die Freiheit und
anderes noch.) (Einwirkung der Kommunikationsmittel.) Weltgeschichte
eigentlich[168] nicht immer in der Geschichte als weltgeschicht[liches]
Resultat.

8. Der Ausgangspunkt [ist] natürlich von der Naturbestimmtheit [zu
nehmen]; subjektiv und objektiv, Stämme, Rassen etc.‖

It is well known that certain periods of highest development of art
stand in no direct connection with the general development of society,
nor with the material basis and the skeleton structure of its
organization. Witness the example of the Greeks as compared with the
modern nations or even Shakespeare. As regards certain forms of art, as
e. g. the epos, it is admitted that they can never be produced in the
world-epoch making form as soon as art as such comes into existence; in
other words, that in the domain of art certain important forms of it
are possible only at a low stage of its development. If that be true of
the mutual relations of different forms of art within the domain of art
itself, it is far less surprising that the same is true of the relation
of art as a whole to the general development of society. The difficulty
lies only in the general formulation of these contradictions. No sooner
are they specified than they are explained. Let us take for instance
the relation of Greek art and of that of Shakespeare’s time to our own.
It is a well known fact that Greek mythology was not only the arsenal
of Greek art, but also the very ground from which it had sprung. Is the
view of nature and of social relations which shaped Greek imagination
and Greek [art] possible in the age of automatic machinery, and
railways, and locomotives, and electric telegraphs? Where does Vulcan
come in as against Roberts & Co.; Jupiter, as against the lightning
rod; and Hermes, as against the Credit Mobilier? All mythology masters
and dominates and shapes the forces of nature in and through the
imagination; hence it disappears as soon as man gains mastery over
the forces of nature. What becomes of the Goddess Fame side by side
with Printing House Square?[169] Greek art presupposes the existence
of Greek mythology, i. e. that nature and even the form of society are
wrought up in popular fancy in an unconsciously artistic fashion. That
is its material. Not, however, any mythology taken at random, nor any
accidental unconsciously artistic elaboration of nature (including
under the latter all objects, hence [also] society). Egyptian mythology
could never be the soil or womb which would give birth to Greek art.
But in any event [there had to be] _a_ mythology. In no event [could
Greek art originate] in a society which excludes any mythological
explanation of nature, any mythological attitude towards it and which
requires from the artist an imagination free from mythology.

Looking at it from another side: is Achilles possible side by side with
powder and lead? Or is the Iliad at all compatible with the printing
press and steam press? Does not singing and reciting and the muses
necessarily go out of existence with the appearance of the printer’s
bar, and do not, therefore, disappear the prerequisites of epic poetry?

But the difficulty is not in grasping the idea that Greek art and
epos are bound up with certain forms of social development. It rather
lies in understanding why they still constitute with us a source of
aesthetic enjoyment and in certain respects prevail as the standard
and model beyond attainment.

A man can not become a child again unless he becomes childish. But does
he not enjoy the artless ways of the child and must he not strive to
reproduce its truth on a higher plane? Is not the character of every
epoch revived perfectly true to nature in child nature? Why should the
social childhood of mankind, where it had obtained its most beautiful
development, not exert an eternal charm as an age that will never
return? There are ill-bred children and precocious children. Many of
the ancient nations belong to the latter class. The Greeks were normal
children. The charm their art has for us does not conflict with the
primitive character of the social order from which it had sprung. It is
rather the product of the latter, and is rather due to the fact that
the unripe social conditions under which the art arose and under which
alone it could appear can never return.


(End of Manuscript.)


FOOTNOTES:


[1] Cf. Seligman, “The Economic Interpretation of History.” MacMillan.
1902.

[2] Aristotle, d. Rep. L. l, c. 9 (edit. I Bekkeri Oxonii, 1837)

“ἑκάστου γὰρ κτήματος διττὴ ἡ χρῆσίς ἐστιν ... ἡ μὲν οἰκεία, ἡ δ’ οὐκ
οἰκεία τοῦ πράγματος, οἷον ὑποδήματος ἥ τε ὑπόδησις καὶ ἡ μεταβλητική.
Ἀμφότεραι γὰρ ὑποδήματος χρήσεις· καὶ γὰρ ὁ ἀλλαττόμενος τῷ δεομένῳ
ὑποδήματος ἀντὶ νομίσματος ἢ τροφῆς χρῆται τῷ ὑποδήματι ᾗ ὑπόδημα,
ἀλλ’ οὐ τὴν οἰκείαν χρῆσιν· οὐ γὰρ ἀλλαγῆς ἕνεκεν γέγονεν. Τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ
τρόπον ἔχει καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων κτημάτων.”

(“Of everything which we possess there are two uses:―one is the proper,
and the other the improper or secondary use of it. For example, a shoe
is used for wear, and is used for exchange; both are uses of the shoe.
He who gives a shoe in exchange for money or food to him who wants
one, does indeed use the shoe as a shoe, but this is not its proper
or primary purpose, for a shoe is not made to be an object of barter.
The same may be said of all possessions.” The Politics of Aristotle,
translated into English by B. Jowett, Oxford, 1885, v. I., p. 15.)

[3] That is the reason why German compilers are so fond of dwelling
on use-value, calling it a “good.” See e. g. L. Stein, “System der
Staatswissenschaften,” v. I., chapter on “goods” (Gütter). For
intelligent information on “goods” one must turn to treatises on
commodities.

[4] A ridiculous presumption has gained currency of late to the effect
that common property in its primitive form is specifically a Slavonian,
or even exclusively Russian form. It is the primitive form which we
can prove to have existed among Romans, Teutons, and Celts; and of
which numerous examples are still to be found in India, though in a
partly ruined state. A closer study of the Asiatic, especially of
Indian forms of communal ownership would show how from the different
forms of primitive communism different forms of its dissolution have
been developed. Thus e. g. the various original types of Roman and
Teutonic private property can be traced back to various forms of Indian
communism.

[5] “La Ricchezza è una ragione tra due persone.” (“Value is a relation
between two persons”) Galiani, “Della Moneta,” p. 220 in vol. II.
of Custodi’s collection of “Scrittori classici Italiani di Economia
Politica. Parte Moderna,” Milano, 1803.

[6] “In its natural state, matter ... is always destitute of value.”
McCulloch, “A Discourse on the Rise, Progress, Peculiar Objects, and
Importance of Political Economy,” 2nd edition, Edinburgh, 1825, pg. 48.
It is evident how even a McCulloch stands above the fetishism of German
“thinkers”, who declare “matter” and half a dozen other foreign things
to be elements of value. Cf. e. g. L. Stein, l. c. v. I., p. 110.

[7] Berkeley, _The Querist_, London, 1750.

[8] Thomas Cooper, Lectures on the Elements of Political Economy,
London, 1831, p. 99.

[9] F. List could never grasp the difference between labor as a source
of use-value and labor as the creator of certain social form of wealth
or exchange value, because comprehension was altogether foreign to his
practical mind; he therefore saw in the modern English economists mere
plagiarists of Moses, the Egyptian.

[10] It can be readily understood what kind of “service” is rendered
by the category “service” to economists of the type of J. B. Say and
F. Bastiat, whose pondering sagacity, as Malthus has justly remarked,
always abstracts from the specially definite forms of economic
relations.

[11] “Egli è proprio ancora delle misure d’aver si fatta relazione
colle cose misurate, che in certo modo la misurata divien misura della
misurante.” Montanari, Della Moneta, p. 48 in v. III of Custodi’s
“Scrittori classici Italiani di Economia Politica. Parte Antica.” (“It
is the property of measure to be in such a relation to the things
measured, that in a certain way the thing measured becomes the measure
of the measuring thing.”)

[12] It is in that sense that Aristotle (see the passage quoted at the
beginning of this chapter) conceives exchange value.

[13] This expression is used by Genovesi.

[14] Aristotle makes the same remark with reference to the private
family as the primitive community. But the primitive form of family is
the tribal family, from the historical dissolution of which the private
family develops. ἐν μὲν οὔν τῃ πρώτο κοινωνίᾳ (τοῦτο δ’ ἐστὶν οἰκίἀ)
φανερὸν ὅτι οὐδέν ἐστιν ἔργον αὐτῆς (namely της ἀλλαγῆς) “And in the
first community, which is the family, this art is obviously of no use.”
Jowett’s transl. l. c.

[15] “Money is, in fact, only the instrument for carrying on buying
and selling (but, if you please, what do you understand by buying and
selling?) and the consideration of it no more forms a part of the
science of political economy, than the consideration of ships, or
steam engines, or of any other instrument employed to facilitate the
production and distribution of wealth.” Th. Hodgskin, Popular Political
Economy, etc. London, 1827, p. 178, 179.

[16] A comparative study of the writings and characters of Petty and
Boisguillebert, outside of the light which it would throw upon the
difference of French and English society at the end of the seventeenth
and the beginning of the eighteenth centuries, would disclose the
origin of the national contrast between English and French Political
Economy. The same contrast reasserts itself in Ricardo and Sismondi.

[17] Petty had illustrated the productive power inherent in the
division of labor on a much grander scale than that was done later by
Adam Smith. See his “Essay concerning the multiplication of mankind,
etc.,” 3rd edition, 1686, p. 35-36. He not only brings out the
advantages of the division of labor on the example of the manufacture
of a watch, as Adam Smith did later on that of a needle, but considers
also a city and an entire country from the point of view of a large
manufacturing establishment. The Spectator, of November 26, 1711,
refers to this “illustration of the admirable Sir William Petty.”
McCulloch is, therefore, mistaken when he supposes that the Spectator
confounded Petty with a writer forty years his junior. See McCulloch,
“The Literature of Political Economy, a classified catalogue,” London,
1845, p. 105. Petty is conscious of being the founder of a new science.
His method, he says, “is not yet very usual, for instead of using
only comparative and superlative Words, and intellectual Arguments,”
he has undertaken to speak “in Terms of Number, Weight or Measure;
to use only Arguments of Sense, and to consider only such Causes, as
have visible Foundations in Nature; leaving those that depend upon
the mutable Minds, Opinions, Appetites, and Passions of particular
Men, to the Consideration of others.” (Political Arithmetick, etc.,
London, 1699. Preface.) (A new edition of “The Economic Writings of Sir
William Petty,” edited by Chas. Henry Hull, has been published by the
University Press at Cambridge, 1899. The above passage will be found
in vol. I., p. 244. The further references are given to this new, more
accessible edition. Translator.) His wonderful keenness shows itself
e. g. in the proposal to transport “all the moveables and people of
Ireland, and of the Highlands of Scotland ... into the rest of Great
Britain.” Thereby much labor-time would be saved, the productivity of
labor increased, and “the King and his Subjects would thereby become
more Rich and Strong.” (Political Arithmetick, ch. 4, p. 285.) Or
in the chapter of his Political Arithmetic in which he proves that
England’s mission is the conquest of the world’s market at a time when
Holland still played the leading part as a trading nation and France
seemed to be on the way of becoming the ruling trading Power: “That the
King of England’s Subjects, have Stock competent and convenient, to
drive the Trade of the whole Commercial World” (l. c., ch. 10, p. 311).
“That the Impediments of England’s greatness are but contingent and
removable” (l. c., ch. 5, p. 298). A singular humor pervades all his
writings. Thus, he shows that it was by material means that Holland―at
that time the model country with English economists, just as England
is with continental economists to-day―conquered the world market
“without such Angelical Wits and Judgments, as some attribute to the
Hollanders” (l. c., p. 258). He advocates “Liberty of Conscience” as a
condition of trade, because “Dissenters ... are ... patient Men, and
such as believe that Labour and Industry is their Duty towards God,”
and “They believe that ... for those who have less Wealth, to think
they have the more Wit and Understanding, especially of the things
of God which they think chiefly belong to the Poor.” “From whence it
follows that Trade is not fixt to any species of Religion as such; but
rather ... to the Heterodox part of the whole” (l. c., p. 262-264). He
advocates an “allowance by Publick Tax” for those “who live by begging,
cheating, stealing, gaming, borrowing without intention of restoring,”
because “it were more for the publick profit” to tax the country for
such persons “than to suffer them to spend extravagantly, at the only
charge of careless, credulous, and good natured People” (p. 269-270).
But he is opposed to taxes which transfer the wealth from industrious
people “to such as do nothing at all, but eat and drink, sing, play,
and dance; nay such as study the Metaphysicks” (ibid.). Petty’s
writings are rarities of the bookseller’s trade and are to be found
only in scattered poor old editions, which is the more surprising since
William Petty was not only the father of English Political Economy,
but also the ancestor of Henry Petty, alias Marquis of Lansdowne, the
nestor of the English Whigs. However, the Lansdowne family could hardly
bring out a complete edition of Petty’s works without prefacing it
with his biography, and what can be said of most origins of the great
Whig families holds good also in this case, viz., “the less said of
them the better.” The keen-witted but cynical army surgeon who was as
ready to plunder in Ireland under the shield of Cromwell as to crawl
before Charles II. to get the title of baron which he needed for his
plunderings, is a model hardly fit for public exhibition. Besides that,
Petty seeks to prove in most of his writings which he published in his
lifetime, that England’s prosperity reached its climax under Charles
II., a heterodox view for the hereditary exploiters of the “glorious
revolution.”

[18] In contrast with the “black art of finance” of his time,
Boisguillebert says: “La science financière n’est que la connaissance
approfondie des intérêts de l’agriculture et du commerce.” Le Détail de
la France, 1697. Eugène Daire’s edition of Economistes financiers du
XVIII. siècle, Paris, 1843, vol. I., p. 241.

[19] But not _Romance_ Political Economy, since the Italians reproduce
the contrast between the English and French economists in the two
respective schools of Naples and Milan, while the Spaniards of the
earlier period are either pure Mercantilists; modified mercantilists
like Ustariz; or, like Jovellanos (see his Obras, Barcelona, 1839-40),
hold to the “golden mean” with Adam Smith.

[20] “La véritable richesse ... jouissance entière, non seulement des
besoins de la vie, mais même de tous les superflus et de tout, ce qui
peut fair plaisir à la sensualité,” Boisguillebert, “Dissertation sur
la nature de la richesse,” etc., l. c., p. 403. But while Petty was
a frivolous, rapacious and unprincipled adventurer, Boisguillebert,
though an intendant under Louis XIV, championed the interests of the
oppressed classes with a daring that was equal to his keenness of mind.

[21] The French Socialism of the Proudhon type suffers from the same
national hereditary disease.

[22] “Benjamin Franklin, The Works of, etc.,” ed. by I. Sparks, vol.
II., Boston, 1836. “A Modest Inquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a
Paper Currency.”

[23] L. c., p. 265.

[24] L. c., p. 267.

[25] L. c., “Remarks and Facts relative to the American Paper Money,”
1764.

[26] See “Papers on American Politics; Remarks and Facts relative to
the American Paper Money,” 1764, l. c.

[27] See e. g. Galiani, “Della Moneta,” in vol. 3 of Scrittori Classici
italiani di Economia politica (Published by Custodi). Parte Moderna,
Milano, 1803. “La fatica, he says, è l’unica che dà valore alla cosa”
(“only effort can give value to any thing”). The designation of labor
as “fatica,” strain, effort, is characteristic of the southerner.

[28] Steuart’s work, “An Inquiry into the Principles of Political
Economy, being an Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free
Nations,” appeared first in London in two quarto volumes in the year
1767, ten years before Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations.” I quote from
the Dublin edition of 1770. (The references to pages are the same for
the standard London edition of 1767, except where otherwise stated.
Translator.)

[29] Steuart, l. c., vol. I., p. 181-183.

[30] Steuart, l. c., vol. I., p. 361-362.

[31] See chapter I., book II., vol. I. “of the reciprocal connections
between Trade and Industry” (Translator).

[32] He declares, therefore, the patriarchal form of agriculture which
is devoted to the direct production of use-values for the owner of the
land, to be an “abuse,” not in Sparta, or Rome, or even in Athens, but
in the industrial countries of the eighteenth century. This “abusive
agriculture” is not “trade,” but a “direct means of subsisting.” Just
as capitalistic agriculture clears the country of superfluous mouths,
so does the capitalistic mode of manufacture clear the factory of
superfluous hands.

[33] Thus e. g., Adam Smith says: “Equal quantities of labour, at all
times and places, may be said to be of equal value to the labourer. In
his ordinary state of health, strength and spirits, in the ordinary
degree of his skill and dexterity, he must always lay down the same
portion of his ease, his liberty, and his happiness. The price which
he pays must always be the same, whatever may be the quantity of goods
which he receives in return for it. Of these, indeed, it may sometimes
purchase a greater and sometimes a smaller quantity; but it is their
value which varies, not that of the labour which purchases them....
Labour alone, therefore, never varying in its own value ... is their
[commodities’] real price, etc. Adam Smith (Book I., ch. V., p. 34,
Oxford, 1869. Translator.)

[34] David Ricardo, “On the Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation,” 3rd edition, London, 1821, p. 3.

[35] Sismondi, “Etudes sur l’Economie Politique,” t. II., Bruxelles,
1837. “C’est l’opposition entre la valeur usuelle ... et la valeur
échangeable à laquelle le commerce a reduit toute chose,” p. 161.
[Paris edition, p. 229, Transl.]

[36] Sismondi l. c., p. 163-166 seq. [Paris edition, 230 etf. Transl.]

[37] Perhaps the silliest to be found are the annotations of J. B.
Say to the French translation of Ricardo, made by Constancio, and the
most pedantically arrogant are the remarks of Mr. MacLeod in his newly
published “Theory of Exchange,” London, 1858.

[38] This objection raised against Ricardo by bourgeois economists was
taken up later by the socialists. Having assumed the correctness of the
formula, they charged the practice with contradiction to the theory and
appealed to bourgeois society to realize in practice the conclusions
which were supposed to follow from its theoretical principles. That
was at least the way in which the English socialists turned Ricardo’s
formula of exchange value against political economy. It remained for
Mr. Proudhon not only to proclaim the fundamental principle of old
society as the principle of the new, but also to declare himself the
discoverer of the formula in which Ricardo summed up the combined
results of classical English political economy. It has been proven that
the utopian interpretation of the Ricardian formula was about forgotten
in England when Mr. Proudhon “discovered” it on the other side of the
Canal. (Cf. my work: “Misère de la Philosophie,” etc., Paris, 1847,
paragraph on la valeur constituée.)

[39] True, Aristotle sees that the exchange value of commodities
underlies their prices: “ὅτι ὴ ἀλλαγη ἥν πρὶν τὸ νόμισμα ἔιναι, ὁῆλον·
διαφέρει γὰρ οὐδὲν ἡ εί κλίναι πέντε ἀντι οἰκίας, ἣ ὅσου αὶ πέντε
κλῖναι.” (“It is clear that exchange existed before coin. For it does not
make any difference whether you give five beds for a house, or as much
money as five beds are worth”). On the other hand, since commodities
acquire only in price the form of exchange value with respect to one
another, he makes them commensurable through money. “Διὸ δεῖ πάντα
τετιμῆσθαι· οὕτω γὰρ ἀεὶ ἔσται ἀλλαγὴ, εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, κοινωνία. Τὸ δὴ
νόμισμα ὥσπερ μέτρον σύμμετρα ποιῆσαν ἰσάζει, οὔτε γὰρ ἃν μὴ οὔσης
ἀλλαγῆς κοινωνία ἡν, ὄυτ’ ἀλλαγὴ ἰσότητος μὴ οὔτ’ἰσότης, μὴ οὔσης
συμμετρίας.” (“Therefore all has to be appraised. In that way exchange
may always take place, and, with it, society can exist. Coin, like
measure, makes everything commensurable and equal, for without exchange
there would be no society, without equality there would be no exchange,
and without commensurability, no equality.”) He does not conceal from
himself that these different objects measured by money are entirely
incommensurable quantities. What he is after is the common unit of
commodities as exchange values, which as an ancient Greek he was unable
to find. He gets out of the difficulty by making commensurable through
money what is in itself incommensurable, so far as it is necessary for
practical purposes. “Τῇ μὲν οὔν ἀληθείᾳ ἀδύνατον τὰ τοσοῦτον διαφέροντα
σύμμετρα γενέσθαι, πρὸς δὲ τὴν χρείαν ἐνδέχεται ἰκανῶς.” (“In truth
it is impossible to make things that are so different, commensurable,
but for practical purposes it is permissible.”) Aristotle, Ethica
Nicomachea. l. 5, c. 8, edit. Bekkeri. Oxonii, 1837.

[40] The peculiar circumstance that, while the ounce of gold serves
in England as the unit of the standard of money, it is not divided
into aliquot parts has been explained as follows: “Our coinage was
originally adapted to the employment of silver only―hence an ounce of
silver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces
of coin; but as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage
adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an
adequate number of pieces.” Maclaren: “A Sketch of the History of the
Currency,” p. 16, London, 1858.

[41] “Money may continually vary in value and yet be as good a
measure of value as if it remained perfectly stationary. Suppose, for
instance, it is reduced in value.... Before the reduction, a guinea
would purchase three bushels of wheat or 6 days’ labour; subsequently
it would purchase only 2 bushels of wheat, or 4 days’ labour. In both
cases, the relations of wheat and labour to money being given, their
mutual relations can be inferred; in other words, we can ascertain that
a bushel of wheat is worth 2 days’ labour. This, which is all that
measuring value implies, is as readily done after the reduction as
before. The excellence of a thing as a measure of value is altogether
independent of its own variableness in value” (p. 11, Bailey, “Money
and its Vicissitudes.” London, 1837).

[42] “Le monete lequali oggi sono ideali sono le piu antiche d’ogni
nazione, e tutte furono un tempo reali (the latter assertion is too
sweeping), e perchè erano reali con esse si contava.” Galiani, “Della
Moneta,” l. c., p. 153 (“Coins which are ideal to-day [i. e., whose
names no longer correspond to their value] are among the more ancient
with every nation; at one time they were all real, and for that reason
served for the purpose of counting.”)

[43] The romantic A. Müller says: “According to our idea every
independent sovereign has the right to name the metal money, and to
give it a nominal social value, rank, standing and title (p. 276, v.
II., A. H. Müller, “Die Elemente der Staatskunst,” Berlin, 1809). As
far as title is concerned the Hon. Hofrath is right; but he forgets
the _substance_. How confused his “ideas” were, may be seen, e. g.,
from the following passage: “Everybody understands how much depends
upon the right determination of the mint-price, especially in a country
like England, where the government with _magnificent liberality_
coins money gratuitously (Herr Müller seems to think that the members
of the English government defray the mint expenses out of their own
pockets), where it does not charge any mintage, etc., and thus if the
mint-price of gold were set considerably above its market price, if
instead of paying as now £3 17s. 10-1/2d. per 1 oz. of gold, it would
set the price of an ounce of gold at £3 19s., all money would flow
into the mint and exchanging for the silver contained there bring
it into the market to be exchanged there for the cheaper gold; the
latter would in the same manner be brought again to the mint and the
entire coinage system would be upset” (l. c., p. 280-281). To preserve
order in English coinage, Müller falls back on “disorder.” While
shilling and pence are mere names of certain parts of an ounce of gold
represented by signs of silver and copper, he imagines that an ounce
of gold is estimated in gold, silver and copper and thus confers upon
the Englishmen the blessing of a triple standard of value. Silver as a
measure of money, next to gold, was formally abolished only in 1816 by
56 George III., c. 68. As a matter of fact, it was legally abolished
as early as 1734 by 14 George II., c. 42, and still earlier by actual
practice. There were two circumstances that made A. Müller capable of
a so-called higher conception of political economy: first, his wide
ignorance of economic facts; second, his dilettanti-like visionary
attitude toward philosophy.

[44] “Ἀνάχαρσις, πυνθανομένου τινὸς, πρὸς τί οί Ἕλληνες χρῶνται τῷ
ἀργυρίῳ ἕιπε πρὸς τὸ ἀριθμεῖν.” (Athen. Deipn. l. IV. 49. v. 2, ed.
Schweighäuser, 1802.) (When Anacharsis was asked for what purpose the
Greeks used money, he replied, “For reckoning.―‘’“”)

[45] G. Garnier, one of the early French translators of Adam Smith,
conceived the queer notion of fixing a proportion between the use of
money of account and that of actual money. His proportion is 10 to 1.
(G. Garnier, “Histoire de la Monnaie depuis les temps de la plus haute
antiquité,” etc., t. 1, p. 78.)

[46] The act of Maryland in 1723 by which tobacco was made the legal
standard, but its value reduced to terms of English gold money,
namely one penny equal to one pound of tobacco, reminds of the “leges
barbarorum,” in which, inversely, certain sums of money were expressed
in terms of oxen, cows, etc. In that case neither gold nor silver, but
the ox and the cow were the actual material of the money of account.

[47] Thus, we read, e. g., in the “Familiar Words” of Mr. David
Urquhart: “The value of gold is to be measured by itself; how can
any substance be the measure of its own worth in other things? The
worth of gold is to be established by its own weight, under a false
denomination of that weight―and an ounce is to be worth so many pounds
and fractions of pounds. This is falsifying a measure, not establishing
a standard.―‘’“”

[48] “Money is the measure of Commerce, and of the rate of everything,
and therefore ought to be kept (as all other measures) as steady and
invariable as may be. But this cannot be, if your money be made of
two Metals, whose proportion ... constantly varies in respect of one
another.” John Locke: Some Considerations on the Lowering of Interest,
etc., 1691 (p. 166, p. 65 in his Works 7 ed., London, 1768, vol. III.)

[49] Locke says among other things: “ ... call that a Crown now, which
before ... was but a part of a Crown.... An equal quantity of Silver is
always the same Value with an equal quantity of Silver.... For if the
abating 1-20 of the quantity of Silver of any Coin does not lessen its
Value, the abating 19-20 of the quantity of the Silver of any Coin will
not abate its Value. And so a single Penny, being called a Crown, will
buy as much Spice, or Silk, or any other Commodity, as a Crown-Piece,
which contains 20 times as much Silver.... Now [all that may be done]
is giving a less quantity of Silver the Stamp and Denomination of a
greater.... But ’tis Silver and not Names that pay Debts and purchase
Commodities” (l. c., p. 135-145 passim). If to raise the value of
money means nothing but to give any desired name to an aliquot part
of a silver coin, e. g., to call an eighth part of an ounce of silver
a penny, then money may really be rated as high as you please. At the
same time, Locke answered Lowndes that the rise of the market price
above the mint price was due not to the rise of the value of silver,
but to the lighter silver coins. Seventy-seven clipped shillings do not
weigh a particle more than 62 full-weighted ones. Finally he pointed
out with perfect right that, aside from the loss of weight in the
circulating coin, the market price of silver bullion in England could
rise to some extent above its mint price, since the export of silver
bullion was allowed while that of silver coin was prohibited (l. c.,
p. 54-116 passim). Locke was exceedingly careful not to touch upon the
burning question of public debts, and no less carefully avoided the
discussion of the delicate economic question, viz., the depreciation of
the currency out of proportion to its real loss of silver, as was shown
by the rate of exchange and the ratio of silver bullion to silver coin.
We shall return to this question in its general form in the chapter on
the Medium of Circulation. Nicholas Barbon in “A Discourse Concerning
Coining the New Money Lighter, in Answer to Mr. Locke’s Considerations,
etc.,” London, 1696, tried in vain to entice Locke to difficult ground.

[50] Steuart, l. c., v. II., p. 154.

[51] The Querist, l. c., (p. 5-6-7.) The “Queries on Money” are
generally clever. Among other things Berkeley is perfectly right in
saying that by their progress the North American colonies “make it
plain as daylight, that gold and silver are not so necessary for the
wealth of a nation, as the vulgar of all ranks imagine.―‘’“”

[52] Price means here real equivalent in the sense commonly employed by
English economic writers in the seventeenth century.

[53] Steuart, l. c., v. II., p. 154, 299 [1st London edition, of 1767,
v. I., p. 526-531. Transl.].

[54] On the occasion of the last commercial crisis the ideal African
money received loud praise from certain English quarters, after its
seat was this time moved from the coast to the heart of Barbary. The
freedom of the Berbers from commercial and industrial crises was
ascribed to the ideal unit of measure of their bars. Would it not have
been simpler to say that trade and industry are the _conditio sine qua
non_ of commercial and industrial crises?

[55] The Currency Question, The Gemini Letters, London, 1844, p.
260-272, passim.

[56] John Gray: “The Social System. A Treatise on the Principle of
Exchange, Edinburgh, 1831.” Compare with “Lectures on the Nature and
Use of Money, Edinburgh, 1848,” by the same author. After the February
revolution Gray sent a memorial to the provisional French government,
in which he instructs the latter that France is not in need of an
“organization of labour,” but of an “organization of exchange” of which
the plan is fully worked out in his money system. Honest John did not
suspect that sixteen years after the appearance of his “Social System”
a patent for the same discovery would be taken out by the ingenious
Proudhon.

[57] Gray, “The Social System,” etc., p. 63: “Money should be merely
a receipt, an evidence that the holder of it has either contributed
certain value to the national stock of wealth or that he has acquired a
right to the same value from some one who has contributed to it.―‘’“”

[58] An estimated value being previously put upon produce, let it be
lodged in a bank, and drawn out again, whenever it is required, merely
stipulating, by common consent, that he who lodges any kind of property
in the proposed National Bank, may take out of it an equal value of
whatever it may contain, instead of being obliged to draw out the
self-same thing that he put in.” L. c., p. 68.

[59] L. c., p. 16.

[60] Gray: “Lectures on Money, etc.,” p. 182.

[61] L. c., p. 169.

[62] “The business of every country ought to be conducted on a national
capital.” John Gray, “The Social System,” etc., p. 171.

[63] “The land to be transformed into national property.” L. c., p. 298.

[64] See e. g. W. Thompson: “An Inquiry into the Distribution of
Wealth, etc.,” London, 1827. Bray, “Labour’s Wrongs and Labour’s
Remedy,” Leeds, 1839.

[65] Alfred Darimont’s “De la Reforme des banques,” Paris, 1856, may be
considered as a compendium of this melodramatic theory of money.

[66] “Di due sorte è la moneta, ideale e reale; e a dui diversi usi
è adoperata, a valutare le cose e a comperarle. Per valutare è buona
la moneta ideale, cosi come la reale e forse anche più. L’altro uso
della moneta è di comperare quelle cose istesse, ch’ella apprezza ...
i prezzi e i contratti si valutano in moneta ideale e si eseguiscono
in moneta reale.” Galiani, l. c., p. 112 sq. (“Money is of two kinds,
ideal and real; and is adapted to two different uses: to determine
the value of things and to buy them. For the purpose of valuation
ideal money is as good as real and perhaps even better. The other
use of money is to buy the same things which it appraises ... prices
and contracts are determined in ideal money and are executed in real
money.”)

[67] This, of course, does not prevent the market price of commodities
to be above or below their value. However, this consideration is
foreign to simple circulation and belongs to quite another sphere to be
considered later, when we shall investigate the relation between value
and market price.

[68] How deeply some beautiful souls are wounded by the merely
superficial aspect of the antagonism which asserts itself in buying
and selling, may be seen from the following abstract from M. Isaac
Pereire’s: “Leçons sur l’industrie et les finances,” Paris, 1832. The
fact that the same Isaac in his capacity of inventor and dictator
of the “Credit mobilier” has acquired the reputation of the wolf of
the Paris Bourse shows what lurks behind the sentimental criticism
of economics. Says Mr. Pereire at the time an apostle of St. Simons:
“C’est parceque tous les individus sont isolés, séparés les uns des
autres, soit dans leur travaux, soit pour la consommation, qu’il y a
echange entre eux des produits de leur industrie respective. De la
nécessité de l’échange est derivée la nécessité de determiner la valeur
relative des objets. Les idées de la valeur et de l’échange sont donc
intimement liées, et toutes deux dans leur forme actuelle exprime
l’individualisme et l’antagonisme.... Il n’y a lieu a fixer la valeur
des produits que parcequ’il y a vente at achat, en d’autres termes,
antagonisme entre les divers membres de la societé. Il n’y a lieu à
s’occuper du prix, de valeur que là où il y avait vente et echat, c’est
à dire, où chaque individu était obligé de lutter, pour se procurer
les object nécessaires a l’entretien de son existence” (l. c., p. 2,
3 passim). (“Since individuals are isolated and separated from one
another both in their labors and in consumption, exchange takes place
between them in the products of their respective industries. From the
necessity of exchange arises the necessity of determining the relative
value of things. The ideas of value and exchange are thus intimately
connected and both express in their actual form individualism and
antagonism.... The determination of values of products takes place
only because there are sales and purchases, or, to put it differently,
because there is an antagonism between different members of society.
One has to occupy himself with price and value only where there is
sale and purchase, that is to say, where every individual is obliged
to struggle to procure for himself the objects necessary for the
maintenance of his existence.”)

[69] “L’argent n’est que le moyen et l’acheminement, au lieu que les
denrées utiles à la vie sont la fin et le but.” (“Money is but the ways
and means, while the things useful in life are the end and object.”)
Boisguillebert: “Le Détail de la France,” 1697, in Eugene Daires’
“Economistes financiers du XVIIIieme siècle, vol. I., Paris, 1843, p.
210.

[70] In November, 1807, William Spence published a pamphlet in England
under the title: “Britain Independent of Commerce.” The principle set
forth in this pamphlet was further elaborated by William Cobbet in
his “Political Register” under the virulent title, “Perish Commerce.”
To this James Mill replied in 1808 in his “Defence of Commerce” which
contains the passage quoted above from his “Elements of Political
Economy” (p. 190-193, Transl.). In his controversy with Sismondi and
Malthus on commercial crises, J. B. Say appropriated this clever
device, and as it would be difficult to point out with what new idea
this comical “prince de la science” had enriched political economy, his
continental admirers have trumpeted him as the man who had unearthed
the treasure of the metaphysical balance of purchases and sales; as a
matter of fact, his merits consisted rather of the impartiality with
which he equally misunderstood his contemporaries, Malthus, Sismondi
and Ricardo.

[71] The manner in which economists explain the different aspects of
the commodity may be seen from the following examples:

“With money in possession, we have but one exchange to make in order
to secure the object of desire, while with other surplus products
we have two, the first of which (procuring the money) is infinitely
more difficult than the second.” (G. Opdyke, “A Treatise on Political
Economy,” New York, 1851, p. 277-278.)

“The superior saleableness of money is the exact effect or natural
consequence of the less saleableness of commodities.” (Th. Corbet, “An
Inquiry into the Causes and Modes of the Wealth of Individuals.” etc.,
London, 1841, p. 117.)

“Money has the quality of being always exchangeable for what it
measures.” (Bosanquet, “Metallic, Paper and Credit Currency,” etc.,
London, 1842, p. 100.)

“Money can always buy other commodities, whereas other commodities
can not always buy money.” (Th. Tooke, “An Inquiry into the Currency
Principle,” 2d ed., London, 1844, p. 10.)

[72] The same commodity can be bought and resold many times. It
circulates, then, not merely as a commodity, but in a capacity which
does not exist from the point of view of simple circulation, of the
simple contrast of commodity and money.

[73] The quantity of money is immaterial “pourvu qu’il y en ait
assez pour maintenir les prix contractés par les denrées” (as long
as it is sufficient to maintain the existing prices of commodities).
Boisguillebert, l. c. p. 210.

“If the circulation of commodities of four hundred millions required a
currency of forty millions, and ... this proportion of one-tenth was
the due level, estimating both currency and commodities in gold; then,
if the value of commodities to be circulated increased to four hundred
and fifty millions, from natural causes ... I should say the currency,
in order to continue at its level, must be increased to forty-five
millions.” (William Blake, “Observations on the Effects Produced by the
Expenditure of Government, etc.,” London, 1823, p. 80.)

[74] “E la velocità del giro del danaro, non la quantità dei metalli
che fa apparir molto a poco il danaro.” (Galiani, l. c. p. 99.) (“It is
the rapidity of the circulation of money and not the quantity of metals
that causes a greater or smaller amount of money to appear.”)

[75] An example of an extraordinary decline of metallic circulation
from its average level was furnished by England in 1858, as may be
seen from the following extract from the London Economist: “From the
nature of the case (namely, the isolated nature of simple circulation)
very exact data cannot be procured as to the amount of cash that is
fluctuating in the market, and in the hands of the not banking classes.
But, perhaps, the activity or the inactivity of the mints of the
great commercial nations is one of the most likely indications in the
variations of that amount. Much will be manufactured when it is wanted;
and little when little is wanted.... At the English mint the coinage
was in 1855 £9,245,000; 1856, £6,476,000; 1857, £5,293,855. During 1858
the mint had scarcely anything to do.” (Economist, July 10, 1858.) But
at the same time about eighteen million pounds sterling were lying in
the bank vaults.

[76] Dodd, “Curiosities of Industry,” etc., London, 1854.

[77] “The Currency Question Reviewed, etc., by a Banker.” (Edinburgh,
1845, p. 69.)

“Si un écu un peu usé était reputé valoir quelque chose de moins qu’un
écu tout neuf, la circulation se trouverait continuellement arrêtée, et
il n’y aurait pas un seul payement qui ne fut matière à contestation.”
(G. Garnier, l. c. t. I., p. 24.) (“If an ecu slightly used would
pass for a little less than an entirely new ecu, circulation would be
continually interfered with, and not a payment would take place that
would not give rise to controversy.”)

[78] W. Jacob, “An Inquiry Into the Production and Consumption of the
Precious Metals.” (London, 1831, vol. II., ch. XXVI.)

[79] David Buchanan, “Observations on the Subjects Treated of in Dr.
Smith’s Inquiry on the Wealth of Nations,” etc. (Edinburgh, 1841, p. 3.)

[80] Henry Storch, “Cours d’Economic Politique.” etc., avec des notes
par J. B Say. Paris, 1823, tom. IV., p. 179. Storch published his work
in French at St. Petersburg. J. B. Say immediately issued a Parisian
reprint, supplemented with alleged “notes,” which as a matter of fact
contain nothing but commonplaces. Storch (see his “Considerations sur
la Nature du Revenue National,” Paris, 1824) took by no means kindly to
this annexation of his work by the “prince de la science.”

[81] Plato de Rep. L. II “νόμισμα ξύμβολον τῆς ἀλλαγῆς.” (“Money symbol
of exchange.”) Opera omnia, etc., ed. G. Stallbumius, London, 1850, p.
304. Plato develops money only in two capacities―as a measure of value
and a token of value, but demands, in addition to the token of value
serving for home circulation, another one for trade between Greece and
foreign countries. (See also Book V of his Laws.)

[82] Aristotle, Ethic. Nicom, l. 5., ch. 8, l. c.: οἶον δ’ ὑπάλλαγμα
τῆς χρείας τὸ νόμισμα γέγονου κατὰ συνθήκην καὶ διὰ τοὔτο τοὔνομα ἔχει
νόμισμα. ὅτι οὐ φὐσει ἀλλὰ νόμῳ, καὶ ἐφ’ ἡμῖν μεταβαλεῖν καὶ ποιῆσαι
ἄχρηστον.” (“In the satisfaction of wants money became the medium of
exchange by agreement. And for that reason it bears the name νόμισμα,
because it owes its existence, not to nature, but to law (νόμω), and it
is in our power to change it and make it void.”) Aristotle had a far
more comprehensive and deep view of money than Plato. In the following
passage he beautifully shows how barter between different communities
creates the necessity of assigning the character of money to a specific
commodity, i. e., one which has itself an intrinsic value. “Ξενικωτέρας
γὰρ γενομένης τῆς βοηθείας τῷ εἰσάγεσθαι hὦν ἐνδεεῖς καὶ ἔκπεμπειν ὥν
ἐπλέοναζον, ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἡ τοῦ νομίσματος ἐπορίσθη χρῆσις· διὸ πρὸς τὰς
ἀλλαγας τοιοῦτόν τι συνέθεντο πρὸς σφᾶς αὐτοὺς διδόναι καὶ λαμβάνειν,
δ’ τῶν χρησίμων αὐτὸ ὂν εἶχε τὴν χρείαν εὐμεταχείριστον ... οἶον
σίδηρος καὶ ἄργυρος κἂν εἴ τι τοιοῦτον ἕτερον”. (Arist. De Republica,
l. i. p. 9, [secs. 7, 8] l. c.)

(“When the inhabitants of one country became more dependent on those of
another, and they imported what they needed and exported the surplus,
money necessarily came into use ... and hence men agreed to employ in
their dealings with each other something which was intrinsically useful
and easily applicable to the purposes of life, for example, iron,
silver and the like.” Trans, by B. Jowett, “The Politics of Aristotle,
Oxford, 1885, p. 16). This passage is quoted by Michel Chevalier, who
either has not read Aristotle or did not understand him, to prove that
in Aristotle’s opinion currency must consist of a substance having
intrinsic value. On the contrary, Aristotle says expressly that money
as a mere medium of circulation seems to owe its existence to agreement
or law, as is shown by its name νόμισμα, and that in reality it owes
its utility as coin to its function and not to any intrinsic use-value
of its own. λῆρος εἶναι δοκεῖ τὸ νόμισμα καὶ νόμος παντάπασι, φύσει δ’
οὐδὲν ὅτι μεταθε ενων τε τῶν χρωμένων οὐδενὸς ἄξιον οὐδὲ χρήσιμον πρὸς
οὐδὲν τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἑοτί’ (“Others maintain that coined money is a mere
sham, a thing not natural, but conventional only, which would have no
value or use for any of the purposes of daily life if another commodity
were substituted by the users.”) (l. c. sec. 11.)

[83] Mandeville, Sir John, “Voyages and Travels,” London, 1705, p. 105:
“This Emperor (of Cattay or China) may dispende ols muche as he wile
withouten estymacion. For he despendethe not, nor makethe no money, but
of lether empredeth, or of papyre. And when that money bathe ronne so
longe that it begynethe to waste, than men beren it to the Emperoure
Tresorye, and then they taken newe Money for the old. And that money
gothe thorghe out all the contree, and thorge out all his Provynces....
They make no money neither of Gold nor of Sylver,” and “therefore,”
thinks Mandeville, “he may despende ynew and outrageously.”

[84] Benjamin Franklin, “Remarks and Facts Relative to the American
Paper Money,” 1764, p. 348, l. c. “At this very time, even the silver
money in England is obliged to the legal tender for part of its value;
that part which is the difference between its real weight and its
denomination. Great part of the shillings and sixpences now current
are by wearing become 5, 10, 20, and some of the sixpences even 50
per cent., too light. For this difference between the _real_ and the
_nominal_ you have no intrinsic value. You have not so much as paper,
you have nothing. It is the legal tender, with the knowledge that it
can easily be repassed for the same value, that makes three-pennyworth
of silver pass for a sixpence.”

[85] Berkeley, l. c., p. 5-6. “Whether the denominations being
retained, although the bullion were gone ... might not nevertheless ...
a circulation of commerce (be) maintained?”

[86] “Non solo i metalli ricchi son segni delle cose ...; ma
vicendevolmente le cose ... sono segni dell’oro e dell’argento.” (A.
Genovesi, “Lezioni di Economia Civile,” 1765. p. 281 in Custodi, Parte
Mod. 1. VIII.) (“Not only are precious metals tokens of things, but
vice versa, things are tokens of gold and silver.”)

[87] Petty. “Gold and silver are universal wealth.” (Political
Arithmetic, l. c., p. 242.)

[88] E. Misselden. “Free Trade, or the Means to Make Trade Flourish,”
etc., London, 1622. “The natural matter of Commerce is Merchandise,
which Merchants from the end of Trade have stiled Commodities. The
Artificiall matter of Commerce is Money, which hath obtained the title
of sinewes of warre and of State.... Money, though it be in nature
and time after Merchandise, yet forasmuch as it is now in use become
the chiefe.” (p. 7.) He compares his own treatment of merchandise and
money with the manner of “Old Jacob, who, blessing his Grandchildren,
crost his hands, and laide his right hand on the yonger, and his left
hand on the elder.” (l. c.) Boisguillebert, “Dissert. sur la Nature
Des Richesses,” etc. “Voilà donc l’esclave du commerce devenu son
maître.... La misère des peuples ne vient que de ce qu’on a fait un
maître, ou plutôt un tyran de ce qui était un esclave.” (p. 395, 399.)

[89] Boisguillebert, l. c. “On a fait une idole de ces métaux (l’or
et l’argent) et laissant là, l’objet et l’intention pour lesquels ils
avaient été appelés dans le commerce, savoir, pour y servir de gages
dans l’échange et la tradition réciproque, on les a presque quittés
de ce service pour en former des divinités, aux quelles on a sacrifié
et sacrifie toujours plus de biens et de besoins précieux et même
d’hommes, que jamais l’aveugle antiquité n’en immola à ces fausses
divinités,” etc. (l. c., p. 395.)

[90] In the first halt of the perpetuum mobile, _i. e._, in the
suspension of the function of money as a medium of circulation,
Boisguillebert at once suspects its independent existence from
commodities. Money, he says, must be “in constant motion, it can be
money only by being mobile, but as soon as it becomes motionless all
is lost.” (“Dans un mouvement continuel, ce qui ne peut être que tant
qu’il est meuble, mais sitôt qu’il devient immeuble tout est perdu.”
“Le Détail de la France,” p. 231.) What he overlooks is that this halt
constitutes the condition of its movement. What he really wants is that
the value form of commodities should appear merely in the transitory
form of their change of matter, but should never become an end in
itself.

[91] “ ... The more the stock ... is ... encreased in wares, the more
it decreaseth in treasure.” (E. Misselden, l. c., p. 23.)

[92] l. c., p. 11-13 passim.

[93] Petty, “Political Arith.,” l. c., p. 196 (1899 edition, v. I, p.
269. Transl.)

[94] Francois Bernier, “Voyage contenant la description des états du
Grand Mogul.” (Paris edition, 1830, t. l., conf., p. 312-314.)

[95] Dr. Martin Luther, “Bücher vom Kaufhandel und Wucher,” 1524.
In the same passage Luther says: “Gott hat uns Deutsche dahin
geschleidert, dass wir unser gold und silber müssen in fremde Länder
stossen, alle Welt reich machen und selbst Bettler Bleiben. England
sollte wohl weniger Goldes haben, wenn Deutschland ihm sein Tuch
liesse, und der König von Portugal sollte auch weniger haben, wenn wir
ihm die Würze liessen. Rechne Du, wie viel eine Messe zu Frankfurt
aus Deutschen Landen gefürt wird, ohne Not und Ursache: so wirst Du
Dich wundern, wie es zugehe, dass noch ein heller in Deutschen Landen
sei. Frankfurt ist das Silber-und Goldloch, dadurch aus Deutschem
Lande fleisst, was nur guillet und wächst, gemünzt oder geschlagen
wird bei uns; wäre das Loch zuegestopft, so dürft man itzt der Klage
nicht hören, die allethalben eitel Schuld und kein Geld, alle Land und
Städte ausgewuchert sind. Aber lass gehen, es will doch also gehen; wir
Deutsche müssen Deutsche bleiben! wir lassen nicht ab, wir müssen denn.”

In the work quoted above Misselden wishes to retain the gold and silver
at least within the confines of Christendom: “The other forreine
remote causes of the want of money, are the Trades maintained out of
Christendome to Turky, Persia and the East Indies, which trades are
maintained for the most part with ready money, yet in a different
manner from the trades of Christendome within itselfe. For although
the trades within Christendome are driven with ready monies, yet
those monies are still contained and continued within the bounds of
Christendome. There is indeede a fluxus and refluxus, a flood and ebbe
of the monies of Christendome traded within it selfe; for sometimes
there is more in one part of Christendome, sometimes there is lesse
in another, as one Country wanteth and another aboundeth: It cometh
and goeth, and whirleth about the Circle of Christendome, but is still
contained within the compasse thereof. But the money that is traded out
of Christendome into the parts aforesaid is continually issued out and
never returneth againe.” (p. 19-20.)

[96] “A nummo prima origo avaritiae ... haec paulatim exarsit rabie
quadam, non jam avaritia, sed fames auris.” (Plin., Hist. Nat., l.
XXXIII., c. XIV.)

(“From money first springs avarice ... the latter gradually grows into
a kind of madness, which is no more avarice, but a thirst for gold.”)

[97] Horace thus understands nothing of the philosophy of hoarding when
he says (Satir. l. II., Satir. III): “Siquis emat citharas, emptas
comportat in unum, Nec studio citharae nec musae deditus ulli; Si
scalpra et formas non sutor; nautica vela Aversus mercaturis; delirus
et amens, Undique dicatur merito. Qui discrepat istis, Qui nummos
aurunque recondit nescius uti Compositis metuensque velut contingere
sacrum?”

  “If one buys fiddles, hoards them up when bought,
  Though music’s study ne’er engaged his thought,
  One lasts and awls, unversed in cobbler’s craft,
  One sails for ships, not knowing fore from aft,
  You’d call them mad: but tell me, if you please,
  How that man’s case is different from these,
  Who as he gets it, stows away his gain,
  And thinks to touch a farthing were profane?”

  (Transl. by John Covington, London, 1874, p. 60.)

Mr. Senior understands the question much better: “L’argent paraît être
la seule chose dont le désir est universel, et il en est ainsi parceque
l’argent est _une richesse abstraite_ et parceque les hommes, en la
possédant peuvent satisfaire à tous leur besoins de quelque nature
qu’ils soient.” (“Principes Fondamentaux de l’Economie Politique,
tirés de leçons edites et inedites de N. W. Senior, par Comte Jean
Arrivabene,” Paris, 1836, p. 221. The corresponding passage in the
English edition of his Political Economy, London, 1863, is to be found
on p. 27. Translator.) So does Storch: “Since money represents all
other forms of wealth, it is only necessary to accumulate it to provide
for oneself all kinds of wealth existing in the world.” (l. c., v. 2,
p. 134.)

[98] To what extent the inner man of the commodity owner remains
unchanged, even when he has become civilized and has developed into a
capitalist, is shown by the example of a London representative of a
cosmopolitan banking house who adopted as a fitting coat of arms for
his family a £100,000 bank note, which he had hung up in a glass frame.
The point here is in the mocking contempt of the note for circulation.

[99] See the passage from Xenophon, quoted below.

[100] Jacob, l. c., v. 2, ch. 25 and 26.

[101] “In times of great agitation and insecurity, especially during
internal commotions or invasions, gold and silver articles are rapidly
converted into money; whilst during periods of tranquility and
prosperity, money is converted into plate and jewelry.” (l. c., v. 2,
p. 357.)

[102] In the following passage Xenophon develops money in its specific
forms of money and hoard: “ἐν μόνω τούτῳ ὦν ἐγω οἴδα ἔργων οὐδὲ φθονεῖ
οὐδεις τοῖς ἐπισκευαζομένοις ... ἀργυρῖτις δὲ ὅσω ἄν πλείων φαίνηται,
καὶ ἀργύριον πλεῖον γίγνηται, τοσούτῳ πλείονες ἐπί τὸ ἔργον τοῦτο
ἔρχονται ... καὶ γὰρ δὴ ἔπιπλα μὲν ἐπειδὰν ἰκανά τις κτήσηται τῇ οἰκίᾳ,
οὐ μάλα ἔἱτι προσωνοῦνται· ἀργύριον δὲ οὐδείς πω οὔτω πολὺ ἐκτήσατο
ὥστε μὴ ἔτι προσθεῖσθαι, ἀλλ’ ἤν τισι γένηται παμπληθὲς, τὸ περιττεῦον
κατορύττοντες οὐδὲν ἥττον ἥδονται ἥ χρώμενοι αὐτᾠ· καὶ μὲν ὅταν γε εὗ
πράττωσιν αἰ πόλεις ἰσχυρῶς, οἰ ἄνθρωποι ἀργυρίου δέονται. Οἰ μὲν γὰρ
ἄνδρες ἀμφι ὅπλα τε καλὰ καὶ ἵππους ἀγαρθοὺς καὶ οἰκίας καὶ κατασκευὰς
μεγαλοπρεπεῖς βοὐλονται δαπανᾶν, αἰδὲ γυναῖκες εἰς ἐσθῆτα πολυτελῆ καὶ
χρυσοῦν κόσμον τρέπονται· ὅταν δε αὔ νοσήσωσι πόλεις ἠ ἀφορίαις καρπῶν ῆ
πολέμω ἔτι καὶ πολὺ μἄλλον τῆς γῆς ἀρυοῦ γιγνομενης καὶ εἰς ἐπιτήδεια
καὶ εἰς ἐπικουροὺς νομίσματος δέονται.” (Xen. de Vectigalibus, c. IV.)
(“Of all operations with which I am acquainted, this is the only one
in which no sort of jealousy is felt at a further development of the
industry ... the larger the quantity of ore discovered and the greater
the amount of silver extracted, the greater the number of persons
ready to engage in the operation.... No one when he has got sufficient
furniture for his house dreams of making further purchases on this
head, but of silver no one ever yet possessed so much that he was
forced to cry “Enough.” On the contrary, if ever anybody does become
possessed of an immoderate amount he finds as much pleasure in digging
a hole in the ground and hoarding it as an actual employment of it....
When a state is prosperous there is nothing which people so much desire
as silver. The men want money to expend on beautiful armor and fine
horses, and houses and sumptuous paraphernalia of all sorts. The women
betake themselves to expensive apparel and ornaments of gold. Or when
states are sick, either through barrenness of corn and other fruits,
or through war, the demand for current coin is even more imperative
(whilst the ground lies unproductive), to pay for necessaries or
military aid.” Transl. by H. G. Dakyns, London, 1892, v. 2, Revenues,
p. 335-336.) Aristotle develops in Book I., ch. 9 of his Politics
the two opposite movements of circulation. C-M-C and M-C-M, calling
them “economics” and “chrematistics” respectively. The two forms are
represented by the Greek tragedian Euripides as Sikn (right) and Keodos
(profit).

[103] Of course, capital also is advanced in the shape of money, and
the money thus advanced may be advanced capital, but this point of view
does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation.

[104] “The difference between the means of purchase and the means of
payment” is emphasized by Luther.

[105] Mr. MacLeod, in spite of his doctrinaire conceit about
definitions, fails so utterly to grasp the most elementary economic
relations that he tries to deduce the very origin of money from its
crowning form, viz., that of a means of payment. He says among other
things that since people do not always need each other’s services at
the same time, and not to the same extent, “there would remain over
a certain difference or amount of service due from the first to the
second―debt.” The owner of this debt needs the services of a third
person, who does not directly need those of the second, and “transfers
to the third the debt due to him from the first. Evidence of debts
changes so hands―currency.... When a person received an obligation
expressed by metallic currency, he is able to command the services
not only of the original debtor, but of the whole of the industrious
community.” (MacLeod, “Theory and Practice of Banking,” etc., London,
1855, v. I., ch. I.)

[106] Bailey, l. c., p. 3. “Money is the general commodity of
contracts, or that in which the majority of bargains about property, to
be completed at a future time, are made.”

[107] Says Senior (in his Lectures, published by Comte Arrivabene, l.
c., p. 117): “Since the value of everything changes within a certain
period of time, people select as a means of payment an article whose
value changes least and which retains longest a given average ability
to buy things. Thus, money becomes the expression or representative of
values.” On the contrary: just because gold, silver, etc., have become
money, i. e., the embodiment of independently existing exchange value,
they become the universal means of payment. When the consideration as
to the stability of the value of money mentioned by Mr. Senior comes
into play, i. e., in periods when money asserts itself as the universal
means of payment through the force of circumstances, then is just the
time when fluctuations in the value of money are discovered. Such was
the time of Elizabeth in England, when Lord Burleigh and Sir Thomas
Smith, in view of the manifest depreciation of the precious metals, put
through an act of parliament which obliged the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge to stipulate the payment of one-third of their ground
rents in wheat and malt.

[108] Boisguillebert, who would stem the development of bourgeois
relations of production and violently attacks the bourgeois personally,
has a soft heart for those forms of money in which it appears only
ideally or transiently. Thus he speaks first of the medium of
circulation and next of the means of payment. What he does not see is
the direct transition of money from its ideal to the material form,
since the hard cash is latently present in the ideal measure of value.
That money is but another form of commodities, he says, is shown by
wholesale trade, in which exchange takes place without the intervention
of money, after “les marchandises sont appreciés.” (“Le Detail de la
France,” l. c. p. 210.)

[109] Locke, l. c., p. 17, 18.

[110] “Il danaro ammassato supplisce a quella somma, che per essere
attualmente in circolazione, per l’eventuale promiscuità de’ commerci
si allontana _e sorte della sfera della circolazione medesima_.”
(“The accumulated money supplements that amount which, in order to
be actually in circulation and to meet all possible perturbations of
trade, retires from that sphere of circulation.” G. R. Carli, note
to Berri’s “Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica,” p. 196, t. XV. of
Custodi’s l. c.)

[111] Montanari, “Della Moneta,” 1683, l. c., p. 40. “È cosi fattamente
diffusa per tutto il globo terrestre la communicazione de’ populi
insieme, che puo quasi dirsi esser il mondo tutto divinuto una sola
citta in cui si fa perpetua fiera d’ogni mercanzia, e dove ogni uomo
di tutto cio che la terra, gli animali e l’umana industria altrove
producono, puo mediante il danaro stando in sua casa provedersi e
godere. Maravigliosa invenzione.” (“The communication of nations
among themselves is so widely extended all over the globe that it may
be almost said that the entire world has become one city in which a
perpetual fair of merchandise is held and where every man may by means
of money acquire and enjoy, while staying at home, all that the earth,
the animals and human industry produce elsewhere. Marvelous invention.”)

[112] I metalli han questo di proprio e singulare che in essi soli
tutte le ragioni si riducono ad una che è la loro quantità, non
avendo ricevuto delle natura diversa qualità nè nell’interna loro
constituzione nè nell’externa forma e fattura.” (Galiani, l. c., p.
130.) (“Metals have this singular property, that everything in them is
reduced to one consideration, viz., that of quantity, since they are
not endowed by nature with any differences in quality either in their
internal structure or in their external form and shape.”)

[113] De Orbe Novo. “O, happy coin, which furnishes mankind with a
pleasant and useful beverage and keeps its possessors immune from
the hell-born pest of avarice, since it can not be either buried or
preserved long.”

[114] In 760 a multitude of poor people emigrated to the south of
Prague to wash the gold sand found there, and three men were able to
extract three marks of gold a day. As a result of that the run on
the “diggings” and the number of hands taken away from agriculture
became so great that the country was visited by a famine the following
year. See M. G. Körner, “Abhandlung von dem Alterthum des Böhmischen
Bergwerks,” Schneeberg, 1758.

[115] So far the Australian and other discoveries have not affected the
ratio of the values of gold and silver. The assertions to the contrary
of Michel Chevalier are worth as much as the Socialism of this ex-St.
Simonist. The quotations of silver on the London market prove, however,
that the average gold price of silver during 1850-1858 is not quite
3 per cent. higher than the price during 1830-1850. But this rise in
price is accounted for simply by the Asiatic demand for silver. In
the course of the years 1852-1858 the price of silver was changing in
certain years and months only with a change in this demand, and in no
case with the importation of gold from the newly discovered sources.
The following is a summary of the gold prices of silver on the London
market.

PRICE OF SILVER PER OUNCE.

 _Year―_      _March._       _July._       _November._
  1852      60-1/8 pence   60-1/4 pence   61-7/8 pence
  1853      61-3/8 pence   61-1/2 pence   61-7/8 pence
  1854      61-7/8 pence   61-3/4 pence   61-1/2 pence
  1855      60-7/8 pence   61-1/2 pence   60-7/8 pence
  1856      60     pence   61-1/4 pence   62-1/8 pence
  1857      61-3/4 pence   61-5/8 pence   61-1/2 pence
  1858      61-5/8 pence

[116] “Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it, is master of
all that he desires. By means of gold even admission to Heaven may be
gained for souls.” (Columbus in a letter from Jamaica in 1503).

[117] The slowness of the process was admitted by Hume, although it but
little agrees with his principle. See David Hume “Essays and Treatises
on several subjects.” London, 1777, v. I, p. 300.

[118] Conf. Steuart, l. c. v. I, p. 394-400.

[119] David Hume, l. c. p. 300.

[120] David Hume, l. c. p. 303.

[121] David Hume, l. c. p. 303.

[122] David Hume, l. c. p. 307, 308, 303: “It is evident, that the
prices do not so much depend on the absolute quantity of commodities,
and that of money, which are in a nation, as on that of the
commodities, which can or may come to market, and of the money which
circulates. If the coin be locked up in chests, it is the same thing
with regard to prices, as if it were annihilated; if the commodities be
hoarded in magazines and granaries, a like effect follows. As the money
and commodities in these cases, never meet, they cannot affect each
other. The whole (of prices) at last reaches _a just proportion with
the new quantity of specie which is in the kingdom_.”

[123] See _Law_ and _Franklin_ about surplus value which gold and
silver are supposed to acquire from their function of money. Also
_Forbonnais_.

[124] This fiction is literally advanced by Montesquieu. [The passage
from Montesquieu is quoted by Marx in his Capital, v. I. Part 1, Ch.
III, section 2, b, foot-note. Note by K. Kautsky to 2nd German edition].

[125] Steuart, l. c. v. I., p. 394 seq.

[126] Steuart, l. c., v. 2. p. 377-379 passim (not found in the 1767
London edition. Translator).

[127] Steuart, l. c., p. 379-380 passim (London, 1767 edition, v. l. p.
400. Transl.).

[128] “The additional coin will be locked up, or converted into
plate.... As for the paper money, so soon as it has served the first
purpose of supplying the demand of him who borrowed it, it will
return upon the debtor in it and become realized.... Let the specie
of a country, therefore, be augmented or diminished in ever so great
a proportion, commodities will still rise and fall according to the
principles of demand and competition, and these will constantly
depend upon the inclinations of those who have property or any kind
of equivalent whatsoever to give, but never upon the quantity of coin
they are possessed of.... Let it (namely, the quantity of specie
in a country) be ever so low, while there is real property of any
denomination in the country, a competition to consume in those who
possess it, prices will be high, by the means of barter, symbolical
money, mutual prestations and a thousand other inventions.... If
this country has a communication with other nations, there must
be a proportion between the prices of many kinds of merchandize
there and elsewhere, and a sudden augmentation or diminution of the
specie, supposing it could of itself operate the effects of raising
or sinking prices, would be restrained in its operation by foreign
competition.” l. c. v. 1, p. 400-402. “The circulation of every country
must be in proportion to the industry of the inhabitants producing
the commodities which come to market.... If the coin of a country,
therefore, falls below the proportion of the price of industry offered
to sale, inventions, like symbolical money, will be fallen upon, to
provide for an equivalent for it. But if the specie be found above the
proportion of industry, it will have no effect in raising prices, nor
will it enter into circulation: it will be hoarded up in treasures....
Whatsoever be the quantity of money in a nation, in correspondence with
the rest of the world, there never can remain in circulation, but the
quantity nearly proportional to the consumption of the rich and to the
labour and industry of the poor inhabitants,” and this proportion is
not determined “by the quantity of money actually in the country” (l.
c. p. 403-408 passim.) “All nations will endeavor to throw their ready
money, not necessary for their own circulation, into that country where
the interest of money is high with respect to their own.” (l. c. v. 2.
p. 5). “The richest nation in Europe may be the poorest in circulating
specie.” l. c., v. 2, p. 6. For the polemics against Steuart see Arthur
Young. [In his foot-note in Capital, v. 1, Part 1, ch. III., section
2, b. p. 62, Humboldt ed., Marx says: The theory of Hume was defended
against the attacks of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his
“Political Arithmetic,” London, 1774, in which work there is a special
chapter entitled “Prices depend on quantity of money.” Note by K.
Kautsky to 2nd German edition].

[129] Steuart, l. e., v. 2, p. 370. Louis Blanc translates the
expression “money of the society” which stands for home or national
money, as socialist money, which is perfectly meaningless and makes
a Socialist of John Law. (See the first volume of his History of the
French Revolution).

[130] Maclaren, l. c. p. 43 seq. Patriotism led Gustav Julius, a
German writer who met with very early death, to hold up old Büsch as
an authority as against the Ricardian school. Honest Büsch rendered
Steuart’s elegant English into Hamburg Platt and by trying to improve
upon the original spoiled it as often as he could.

[131] Note to the 2nd edition: This is not an exact statement. Adam
Smith expresses the law correctly on many occasions. [See Capital,
Humboldt edition, p. 62, ft-note 1, where writing seven years later,
Marx makes the following qualification: “This statement applies only
in so far as Adam Smith, _ex officio_, treats of money. Now and then,
however, as in his criticism of the earlier systems of political
economy, he takes the right view. ‘The quantity of coin in every
country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be
circulated by it.... The value of the goods annually bought and sold
in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and
distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to
no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum
sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more.’ Wealth of Nations,
Book iv., ch. I.”]

[132] The distinction between currency and money is therefore
not found in “Wealth of Nations.” Deceived by the apparent impartiality
of Adam Smith, who knew his Hume and Steuart very well, honest Maclaren
remarks: “The theory of the dependence of prices on the extent of the
currency had not as yet, attracted attention; and Doctor Smith, like
Mr. Locke (Locke undergoes a change in his view), considers metallic
money nothing but a commodity.” Maclaren, l. c. p. 44.

[133] David Ricardo, “The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of
the Depreciation of Bank-notes.” 4th edition, London, 1811. (The first
edition appeared in 1809). Further, “Reply to Mr. Bosanquet’s Practical
Observations on the Report of the Bullion Committee.” London, 1811.

[134] David Ricardo: “On the Principles of Political Economy,
etc.” p. 77. “Their value [of metals] [like that of all other
commodities], depends on the total quantity of labour necessary to
obtain the metal, and to bring it to market.”

[135] 1 p. 77, 180, 181.

[136] Ricardo, l. c. p. 421. “The quantity of money that can be
employed in a country must depend on its value: if gold alone were
employed for the circulation of commodities, a quantity would be
required, one fifteenth only of what would be necessary, if silver were
made use of for the same purpose.” See also Ricardo’s: “Proposals for
an Economical and Secure Currency,” London, 1816, p. 89, where he says:
“The amount of notes in circulation depends on the amount required for
the circulation of the country; which is regulated ... by the value
of the standard [of money], the amount of payments, and the economy
practised in effecting them.”

[137] Ricardo, “Principles of Political Economy”, p. 432.

[138] David Ricardo, “Reply to Mr. Bosanquet’s Practical Observations,
etc.” p. 49. “That commodities would rise or fall in price, in
proportion to the increase or diminution of money, _I assume as a fact
which is incontrovertible_.”

[139] David Ricardo, “The High Price of Bullion,” etc. “Money would
have the same value in all countries.” p. 4. In his Political Economy
Ricardo modified this statement, but not in a way to affect what has
been said here.

[140] l. c. p. 3-4.

[141] l. c., p. 4.

[142] Ricardo, l. c., p. 11-12.

[143] Ricardo, l. c., p. 14.

[144] l. c., p. 17.

[145] Ricardo, l. c., p. 74-75. “England, in consequence of a bad
harvest, would come under the case of a country having been deprived
of a part of its commodities, and, therefore, requiring a diminished
amount of circulating medium. The currency which was before equal to
her payments would now become superabundant and relatively cheap,
in proportion ... of her diminished production; the exportation of
this sum, therefore, would restore the value of her currency to the
value of the currencies of other countries.” His confusion of money
and commodity, and of money and coin borders on the ludicrous in
the following passage: “If we can suppose that after an unfavorable
harvest, when England has occasion for an unusual importation of corn,
another nation is possessed of a superabundance of that article, but
has no wants for any commodity whatever, it would unquestionably follow
that such nation would not export its corn in exchange for commodities:
_but neither would it export corn for money_, as that is a commodity
which no nation ever wants absolutely, but relatively.” l. c., p.
75. Pushkin in his hero poem makes the father of his hero incapable
of comprehending that commodities are money. But that money is a
commodity, the Russians have understood from times of yore as is proven
not only by the English corn imports in 1838-1842, but by the entire
history of their commerce.

[146] Conf. Thomas Tooke, “History of Prices,” and James Wilson,
“Capital, Currency and Banking.” (The latter work is a reprint of a
series of articles which appeared in the London Economist in 1844, 1845
and 1847.)

[147] James Deacon Hume: “Letters on the Corn Laws.” London, 1834, p.
29-31. [Letter by H. B. T. on the Corn Laws and on the Rights of the
Working Classes. Transl.]

[148] Thomas Tooke, “History of Prices,” etc. London, 1848, p. 110.

[149] Conf. W. Blake’s above quoted “Observations etc.”

[150] James Mill: “Elements of Political Economy.” [London, 1821, p.
95-101 passim. Transl.]

[151] A few months before the outbreak of the commercial crisis of
1857, a committee of the House of Commons was in session to inquire
into the effect of the bank-laws of 1844 and 1845. Lord Overstone, the
theoretical father of these laws, delivered himself of this boast in
his testimony before the committee: “By strict and prompt adherence
to the principles of the act of 1844, everything has passed off with
regularity and ease; the monetary system is safe and unshaken, the
prosperity of the country is undisputed, the public confidence in
the wisdom of the act of 1844 is daily gaining strength; and if the
committee wish for further practical illustration of the soundness of
the principles on which it rests, or of the beneficial results which it
has assured, the true and sufficient answer to the committee is, look
around you; look at the present state of trade of the country, look
at the contentment of the people; look at the wealth and prosperity
which pervades every class of the community; and then, having done so,
the committee may be fairly called upon to decide whether they will
interfere with the continuance of an act under which these results have
been developed.” Thus did Overstone blow his own horn on the fourteenth
of July, 1857; on the twelfth of November of the same year the Ministry
had to suspend on its own responsibility the wonderful law of 1844.

[152] Tooke was entirely ignorant of Steuart’s work, as may be seen
from his “History of Prices for 1839-1847,” London, 1848. where he
reviews the history of the theories of money.

[153] Tooke’s most important work besides the “History of Prices” which
his co-worker Newmarch published in six volumes, is “An Inquiry into
the Currency Principle, the Connection of the Currency with Prices”
etc., 2nd edition, London, 1844. Wilson’s book we have already quoted.
Finally there is to be mentioned John Fullarton’s “On the Regulation of
Currencies,” 2d edition, London, 1845.

[154] “We ought to ... distinguish ... between gold ... as merchandise,
_i. e._ as capital, and gold ... as currency” (Tooke, “An Inquiry into
the Currency Principle, etc.” p. 10). “Gold and silver may be counted
upon to realize on their arrival nearly the exact sum required to be
provided ... gold and silver possess an infinite advantage over all
other description of merchandize ... from the circumstance of being
universally in use as money.... It is not in tea, coffee, sugar or
indigo that debts, whether foreign or domestic, are usually contracted
to be paid, but in coin; and the remittance, therefore, either in the
identical coin designated, or in bullion which can be promptly turned
into that coin through the mint or market of the country to which
it is sent, must always afford to the remitter, the most certain,
immediate, and accurate means of affecting this object, without risk
of disappointment from the failure of demand or fluctuation of price.”
(Fullerton, l. c. p. 132-133.) “Any other article (except gold or
silver) might in quantity or kind be beyond the usual demand of the
country to which it is sent.” (Tooke: “An Inquiry, etc.”)

[155] The transformation of money into capital we shall consider in the
third chapter which treats of capital and forms the end of the first
book.

[156] This introduction was first published in the Neue Zeit (see
Translator’s Preface, p. 5) of March 7, 14 and 21, 1903, by Karl
Kautsky, with the following explanation:

“This article has been found among the posthumous papers of Karl Marx.
It is a fragmentary sketch of a treatise that was to have served as an
introduction to his main work, which he had been writing for many years
and whose outline was clearly formed in his mind. The manuscript is
dated August 23, 1857.... As the idea is very often indicated only in
fragmentary sentences, I have taken the liberty of introducing here and
there changes in style, insertions of words, etc.... A mere reprint of
the original would have made it unintelligible.... Not all the words in
the manuscript are legible....

“Wherever there could be no doubt as to the necessity of corrections,
I did so without indicating them in the text; in other cases I put all
insertions in brackets. Wherever I am not certain as to whether I have
deciphered a word correctly, I have put an interrogation point after
it; other changes are specially noted. In all other respects this is
an exact reprint of the original, whose fragmentary and incomplete
passages serve to remind us only too painfully of the many treasures
of thought which went down to the grave with Marx, treasures which
would have sufficed for generations if Marx had not so anxiously
avoided giving to the world any of his ideas until he had tested them
repeatedly from every conceivable point of view and had given them a
wording that would be incontrovertible. In spite of its fragmentary
character it opens before us a wealth of new points of view.”

[157] The original reads “person.”

[158] The manuscript reads “production.”

[159] The manuscript reads “production.”

[160] The German text reads “instruktiv,” which I take to be a misprint
of “instinktiv.” Translator.

[161] Compare this with foot-note 1, on p. 34 of Capital, Humboldt
edition, New York:

“Truly comical is M. Bastiat, who imagines that the ancient Greeks and
Romans lived by plunder alone. But when people plunder for centuries,
there must always be something at hand for them to seize; the objects
of plunder must be continually reproduced.” K. Kautsky.

[162] The English expression is used by Marx in his German original.
Transl.

[163] Marx evidently has in mind here a passage in Adam Smith’s Wealth
of Nations (vol. 2, ch. 2) in which he speaks of the circulation of
a country as consisting of two distinct parts: circulation between
dealers and dealers, and that between dealers and consumers. The word
dealer signifies here not only a merchant or shopkeeper, but also a
producer. K. Kautsky.

[164] Here two words in the manuscript can not be deciphered. They look
like “ausser sich” (“outside of itself”). K. Kautsky.

[165] Distribution (Verkehr) is used here in the sense of physical
distribution of goods and not in sense of economic distribution of the
shares of the products between the different factors of production.
Translator.

[166] As the “notes” written down by Marx in the following eight
paragraphs are extremely fragmentary, making translation in some cases
impossible without a certain degree of interpretation, and as the
original is not accessible in book-form, they are reproduced here in
German for the benefit of the student who may feel interested in the
original wording as it had been jotted down by Marx.

[167] Im Original ist zu lesen Va

[168] Im Original ist zu lesen egtl.

[169] The site of the “Times” building in London. K. K.
﻿SECRET DIPLOMATIC HISTORY OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

       *       *       *       *       *

_Demy 8vo, pp._ 656, xvi. 10_s._ 6_d._

THE EASTERN QUESTION.

Letters written 1853-1856 dealing with the events of the Crimean War.

By KARL MARX.

Edited by ELEANOR MARX AVELING and EDWARD AVELING.


                         OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

     "With all Marx's faults and his extravagant abuse of high political
     personages, one cannot but admire the man's strength of mind, the
     courage of his opinions, and his scorn and contempt for everything
     small, petty, and mean. Although many and great changes have taken
     place since these papers appeared, they are still valuable not only
     for the elucidation of the past, but also for throwing a clearer
     light upon the present as also upon the future."--_Westminster
     Review._

     "All that Marx's hand set itself to do, it did with all its might,
     and in this volume, as in the rest of his work, we see the
     indefatigable energy, the wonderful grasp of detail, and the keen
     and marvellous foresight of a master mind."--_Justice._

     "A very masterly analysis of the condition, political, economic and
     social, of the Turkish Empire, which is as true to-day as when it
     was written."--_Daily Chronicle._

     "The letters contain an enormous amount of well-digested
     information, and display great critical acumen, amounting in some
     cases almost to prevision. The biographical interest of the volume
     is also pronounced, for prominent men of that period are dissected
     and analysed with a vigour and freedom which are as refreshing to
     readers as they would be disconcerting to their subjects were they
     alive. A perusal of the book must greatly tend to a clearer
     perception of the later Eastern issues, which are now engaging the
     attention and testing the diplomatic talents of the ambassadors at
     Constantinople."--_Liverpool Post._


LONDON: SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO., LIMITED.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECRET DIPLOMATIC HISTORY OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

BY

KARL MARX

Edited by his Daughter ELEANOR MARX AVELING

[Illustration: Logo]

LONDON
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO., LIMITED
PATERNOSTER SQUARE
1899

       *       *       *       *       *

BUTLER & TANNER,
THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS,
FROME, AND LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *




PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

In the Preface to "The Eastern Question," by Karl Marx, published in
1897, the Editors, Eleanor Marx Aveling and Edward Aveling, referred to
two series of papers entitled "The Story of the Life of Lord
Palmerston," and "Secret Diplomatic History of the Eighteenth Century,"
which they promised to publish at an early date.

Mrs. Aveling did not live long enough to see these papers through the
press, but she left them in such a forward state, and we have had so
many inquiries about them since, that we venture to issue them without
Mrs. Aveling's final revision in two shilling pamphlets.

THE PUBLISHERS.




Secret Diplomatic History of the Eighteenth Century




CHAPTER I


NO. 1. MR. RONDEAU TO HORACE WALPOLE.

"PETERSBURG, _17th August, 1736_.[1]

" ... I heartily wish ... that the Turks could be brought to condescend
to make the first step, for this Court seems resolved to hearken to
nothing till that is done, to mortify the Porte, that has on all
occasions spoken of the Russians with the greatest contempt, which the
Czarina and her present Ministers cannot bear. Instead of being obliged
to Sir Everard Fawkner and Mr. Thalman (the former the British, the
latter the Dutch Ambassador at Constantinople), for informing them of
the good dispositions of the Turks, Count Oestermann will not be
persuaded that the Porte is sincere, and seemed very much surprised that
they had written to them (the Russian Cabinet) without order of the King
and the States-General, or without being desired by the Grand Vizier,
and that their letter had not been concerted with the Emperor's Minister
at Constantinople.... I have shown Count Biron and Count Oestermann the
two letters the Grand Vizier has written to the King, and at the same
time told these gentlemen that as there was in them several hard
reflections on this Court, I should not have communicated them if they
had not been so desirous to see them. Count Biron said that was nothing,
for they were used to be treated in this manner by the Turks. I desired
their Excellencies not to let the Porte know that they had seen these
letters, which would sooner aggravate matters than contribute to make
them up...."


NO. 2. SIR GEORGE MACARTNEY TO THE EARL OF SANDWICH.

"ST. PETERSBURG, _1st (12th) March, 1765_.

"Most Secret.[2]

" ... Yesterday M. Panin[3] and the Vice-Chancellor, together with M.
Osten, the Danish Minister, signed a treaty of alliance between this
Court and that of Copenhagen. By one of the articles, a war with Turkey
is made a _casus foederis_; and whenever that event happens, Denmark
binds herself to pay Russia a subsidy of 500,000 roubles per annum, by
quarterly payments. Denmark also, by a most secret article, promises to
disengage herself from all French connections, demanding only a limited
time to endeavour to obtain the arrears due to her by the Court of
France. At all events, she is immediately to enter into all the views of
Russia in Sweden, and to act entirely, though not openly, with her in
that kingdom. Either I am deceived or M. Gross[4] has misunderstood his
instructions, when he told your lordship that Russia intended to stop
short, and leave all the burden of Sweden upon England. However desirous
this Court may be that we should pay a large proportion of every
pecuniary engagement, yet, I am assured, she will always choose to take
the lead at Stockholm. Her design, her ardent wish, is to make a common
cause with England and Denmark, for the total annihilation of the French
interest there. This certainly cannot be done without a considerable
expense; but Russia, at present, does not seem unreasonable enough to
expect that WE SHOULD PAY THE WHOLE. It has been hinted to me that
£1,500 per annum, on our part, would be sufficient to support our
interest, and absolutely prevent the French from ever getting at
Stockholm again.

"The Swedes, highly sensible of, and very much mortified at, the
dependent situation they have been in for many years, are extremely
jealous of every Power that intermeddles in their affairs, and
particularly so of their neighbours the Russians. This is the reason
assigned to me for this Court's desiring that we and they should act
upon SEPARATE bottoms, still preserving between our respective Ministers
a confidence without reserve. That our first care should be, not to
establish a faction under the name of a Russian or of an English
faction; but, as even the wisest men are imposed upon by a mere name, to
endeavour to have OUR friends distinguished as the friends of liberty
and independence. At present we have a superiority, and the generality
of the nation is persuaded how very ruinous their French connections
have been, and, if continued, how very destructive they will be of their
true interests. M. Panin does by no means desire that the smallest
change should be made in the constitution of Sweden.[5] He wishes that
the royal authority might be preserved without being augmented, and that
the privileges of the people should be continued without violation. He
was not, however, without his fears of the ambitious and intriguing
spirit of the Queen, but the great ministerial vigilance of Count
Oestermann has now entirely quieted his apprehensions on that head.

"By this new alliance with Denmark, and by the success in Sweden, which
this Court has no doubt of, if properly seconded, M. Panin will, in some
measure, have brought to bear his grand scheme of uniting the Powers of
the North.[6] Nothing, then, will be wanted to render it entirely
perfect, but the conclusion of a treaty alliance with Great Britain. I
am persuaded this Court desires it most ardently. The Empress has
expressed herself more than once, in terms that marked it strongly. Her
ambition is to form, by such an union, a certain counterpoise to the
family compact,[7] and to disappoint, as much as possible, all the views
of the Courts of Vienna and Versailles, against which she is irritated
with uncommon resentment. I am not, however, to conceal from your
lordship that we can have no hope of any such alliance, unless we agree,
by some secret article, to pay a subsidy in case of a Turkish war, for
no money will be desired from us, except upon an emergency of that
nature. I flatter myself I have persuaded this Court of the
unreasonableness of expecting any subsidy in time of peace, and that an
alliance upon an equal footing will be more safe and more honourable for
both nations. I can assure your lordship that a Turkish war's being a
_casus foederis_, inserted either in the body of the treaty or in a
secret article, will be a _sine quâ non_ in every negotiation we may
have to open with this Court. The obstinacy of M. Panin upon that point
is owing to the accident I am going to mention. When the treaty between
the Emperor and the King of Prussia was in agitation, the Count
Bestoucheff, who is a mortal enemy to the latter, proposed the Turkish
clause, persuaded that the King of Prussia would never submit to it, and
flattering himself with the hopes of blowing up that negotiation by his
refusal. But this old politician, it seemed, was mistaken in his
conjecture, for his Majesty immediately consented to the proposal on
condition that Russia should make no alliance with any other Power but
on the same terms.[8] This is the real fact, and to confirm it, a few
days since, Count Solme, the Prussian Minister, came to visit me, and
told me that if this Court had any intention of concluding an alliance
with ours without such a clause, he had orders to oppose it in the
strongest manner. Hints have been given me that if Great Britain were
less inflexible in that article, Russia will be less inflexible in the
article of export duties in the Treaty of Commerce, which M. Gross told
your lordship this Court would never depart from. I was assured at the
same time, by a person in the highest degree of confidence with M.
Panin, that if we entered upon the Treaty of Alliance the Treaty of
Commerce would go on with it _passibus æquis_; that then the latter
would be entirely taken out of the hands of the College of Trade, where
so many cavils and altercations had been made, and would be settled only
between the Minister and myself, and that he was sure it would be
concluded to our satisfaction, provided the Turkish clause was admitted
into the Treaty of Alliance. I was told, also, that in case the
Spaniards attacked Portugal, we might have 15,000 Russians in our pay to
send upon that service. I must entreat your lordship on no account to
mention to M. Gross the secret article of the Danish Treaty.... That
gentleman, I am afraid, is no well-wisher to England."[9]


NO. 3.--SIR JAMES HARRIS TO LORD GRANTHAM.

"Petersburg, 16 (27 August), 1782.

"(Private.)

" ... On my arrival here I found the Court very different from what it
had been described to me. So far from any partiality to England, its
bearings were entirely French. The King of Prussia (then in possession
of the Empress' ear) was exerting his influence against us. Count Panin
assisted him powerfully; Lacy and Corberon, the Bourbon Ministers, were
artful and intriguing; Prince Potemkin had been wrought upon by them;
and the whole tribe which surrounded the Empress--the Schuwaloffs,
Stroganoffs, and Chernicheffs--were what they still are, _garçons
perruquiers de Paris_. Events seconded their endeavours. The assistance
the French affected to afford Russia in settling its disputes with the
Porte, and the two Courts being immediately after united as mediators at
the Peace of Teschen, contributed not a little to reconcile them to each
other. I was, therefore, not surprised that all my negotiations with
Count Panin, _from February, 1778, to July, 1779_, should be
unsuccessful, as he meant to prevent, not to promote, an alliance. It
was in vain we made concessions to obtain it. He ever started fresh
difficulties; had ever fresh obstacles ready. A very serious evil
resulted, in the meanwhile, from my apparent confidence in him. He
availed himself of it to convey in his reports to the Empress, not the
language I employed, and the sentiments I actually expressed, but the
language and sentiments he wished I should employ and express. He was
equally careful to conceal her opinions and feelings from me; and while
he described England to her as obstinate, and overbearing, and reserved,
he described the Empress to me as displeased, disgusted, and indifferent
to our concerns; and he was so convinced that, by this double
misrepresentation, he had shut up every avenue of success that, at the
time when I presented to him the Spanish declaration, he ventured to say
to me, ministerially, '_That Great Britain had, by its own haughty
conduct, brought down all its misfortunes on itself; that they were now
at their height; that we must consent to any concession to obtain peace;
and that we could expect neither assistance from our friends nor
forbearance from our enemies._' I had temper enough not to give way to
my feelings on this occasion.... I applied, without loss of time, to
Prince Potemkin, and, by his means, the Empress _condescended_ to see me
alone at Peterhoff. I was so fortunate in this interview, as not only to
efface all bad impressions she had against us, but by stating in its
true light, our situation, and THE INSEPARABLE INTERESTS OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND RUSSIA, to raise in her mind a decided resolution to assist
us. _This resolution she declared to me in express words._ When this
transpired--and Count Panin was the first who knew it--he became my
implacable and inveterate enemy. He not only thwarted by falsehoods and
by a most undue exertion of his influence my public negotiations, but
employed every means the lowest and most vindictive malice could suggest
to depreciate and injure me personally; and from the very infamous
accusations with which he charged me, had I been prone to fear, I might
have apprehended the most infamous attacks at his hands. This relentless
persecution still continues; it has outlived his Ministry.
_Notwithstanding the positive assurances I had received from the Empress
herself_, he found means, first to stagger, and afterwards to alter her
resolutions. He was, indeed, very officiously assisted by his Prussian
Majesty, who, at the time, was as much bent on oversetting our interest
as he now seems eager to restore it. I was not, however, disheartened by
this first disappointment, and, by redoubling my efforts, _I have twice
more, during the course of my mission, brought the Empress to the verge_
(!) _of standing forth our professed friend_, and, each time, my
_expectations were grounded on assurances from her own mouth_. The first
was when _our enemies conjured up the armed_ neutrality;[10] the other
WHEN MINORCA WAS OFFERED HER. Although, on the first of these occasions,
I found the same opposition from the same quarter I had experienced
before, yet I am compelled to say that the principal cause of my failure
was attributable to the very awkward manner in which we replied to the
famous neutral declaration of February, 1780. As I well knew from what
quarter the blow would come, I was prepared to parry it. _My opinion
was: 'If England feels itself strong enough to do without Russia, let it
reject at once these new-fangled doctrines; but if its situation is such
as to want assistance, let it yield to the necessity of the hour,
recognise them as far as they relate to_ RUSSIA ALONE, _and by a
well-timed act of complaisance insure itself a powerful friend._'[11] My
opinion was _not_ received; an ambiguous and trimming answer was given;
_we seemed equally afraid to accept or dismiss them. I was instructed
secretly to oppose, but avowedly to acquiesce in them_, and some
unguarded expressions of one of its then confidential servants, made use
of in speaking to Mr. Simolin, in direct contradiction to the temperate
and cordial language that Minister had heard from Lord Stormont,
_irritated_ the Empress to the last degree, and completed the _dislike_
and _bad opinion_ she entertained of that Administration.[12] Our
enemies took advantage of these _circumstances_.... I SUGGESTED THE IDEA
OF GIVING UP MINORCA TO THE EMPRESS, _because, as it was evident to me
we should at the peace be compelled to make sacrifices, it seemed to me
wiser to make them to our friends than to our enemies_. THE IDEA WAS
ADOPTED AT HOME IN ITS WHOLE EXTENT,[13] _and nothing could be more
perfectly calculated to the meridian of this Court than the judicious
instructions I received on this occasion from Lord Stormont. Why_ this
project failed I am still at a loss to learn. _I never knew the Empress
incline so strongly to any one measure as she did to this, before I had
my full powers to treat, nor was I ever more astonished than when I
found her shrink from her purpose when they arrived._ I imputed it at
the same time, in my own mind, to the _rooted aversion she had for our
Ministry_, and her _total want of confidence in them_; but I since am
more strongly disposed to believe that she consulted the Emperor (of
Austria) on the subject, and that he not only prevailed on her to
decline the offer, but betrayed the secret to France, and that it thus
became public. I cannot otherwise account for this rapid _change of
sentiment in the Empress_, particularly as _Prince Potemkin_ (whatever
he might be in other transactions) was certainly in this _cordial and
sincere_ in his support, and both from what I saw at the time, and from
what has since come to my knowledge, _had its success at heart as much
as myself_. You will observe, my lord, that _the idea of bringing the
Empress forward as a friendly mediatrix went hand-in-hand with the
proposed cession of Minorca_. As this idea has given rise to what has
since followed, and involved us in all the dilemmas of the present
mediation, it will be necessary for me to explain what my views then
were, and to exculpate myself from the blame of having placed my Court
in so embarrassing a situation, _my wish and intention was that she
should be sole mediatrix without an adjoint_; if you have perused what
passed between her and me, in December, 1780, your lordship will readily
perceive how very potent reasons I had to imagine she would be a
friendly and even a partial one.[14] I knew, indeed, she was unequal to
the task; but I knew, too, how greatly _her vanity_ would be flattered
by this distinction, and was well aware that when once engaged she would
persist, and be inevitably involved in our quarrel, particularly when it
should appear (and appear it would) that we had _gratified_ her with
Minorca. The annexing to the mediation the other (Austrian) Imperial
Court entirely overthrew this plan. It not only afforded her a pretence
for not keeping her word, but piqued and mortified her; and it was under
this impression that she made over the whole business to the colleague
we had given her, and ordered her Minister at Vienna to subscribe
implicitly to whatever the Court proposed. Hence all the evils which
have since arisen, and hence those we at this moment experience. I
myself could never be brought to believe that the Court of Vienna, as
long as Prince Kaunitz directs its measures, can mean England any good
or France any harm. It was not with that view that I endeavoured to
promote its influence here, but because _I found that of Prussia in
constant opposition to me_; and because I thought that if I could by any
means smite this, I should get rid of my greatest obstacle. I was
mistaken, and, by a singular fatality, the Courts of Vienna and Berlin
seem never to have agreed in anything but in the disposition to
prejudice us here by turns.[15] The proposal relative to Minorca was the
last attempt I made to induce the Empress to stand forth. I had
exhausted my strength and resources; the freedom with which I had spoken
in my last interview with her, though respectful, had _displeased_; and
_from this period to the removal of the late Administration_, I have
been reduced to act on the defensive.... I have had more difficulty in
preventing the Empress from doing harm than I ever had in attempting to
engage her to do us good. It was to prevent evil, that I inclined
strongly for the acceptation of _her single mediation between us and
Holland, when her Imperial Majesty first offered it_. The _extreme
dissatisfaction_ she expressed _at our refusal_ justified my opinion;
and I TOOK UPON ME, when it was proposed a second time, _to urge the
necessity of its being agreed to_ (ALTHOUGH I KNEW IT TO BE IN
CONTRADICTION OF THE SENTIMENTS OF MY PRINCIPAL), since I firmly
believed, had we again declined it, the Empress would, in a _moment of
anger_, have joined the Dutch against us. As it is, _all has gone on
well_; our _judicious_ conduct has transferred to them the _ill-humour_
she originally was in with us, and she now is as partial to our cause as
she was before partial to theirs. _Since the new Ministry in England, my
road has been made smoother_; the great and new path struck out by _your
predecessor,[16] and which you, my lord, pursue_, has operated a most
advantageous change in our favour upon the Continent. Nothing, indeed,
but events which come home to her, will, I believe, ever induce her
Imperial Majesty to take an active part; but there is now a _strong glow
of friendship_ in our favour; she approves our measures; she _trusts_
our Ministry, and _she gives way to that predilection she certainly has
for our nation_. Our enemies know and feel this; it keeps them in awe.
This is a succinct but accurate sketch of what has passed at this Court
from the day of my arrival at Petersburg to the present hour. Several
inferences may be deduced from it.[17] That the Empress is led by her
passions, not by reason and argument; that her prejudices are very
strong, easily acquired, and, when once fixed, irremovable; while, on
the contrary, there is no sure road to her good opinion; that even when
obtained, it is subject to perpetual fluctuation, and liable to be
biassed by the most trifling incidents; that till she is fairly embarked
in a plan, no assurances can be depended on; but that when once fairly
embarked, she never retracts, and may be carried any length; that with
very bright parts, an elevated mind, an uncommon sagacity, she wants
_judgment_, _precision of idea_, _reflection_, _and_ L'ESPRIT DE
COMBINAISON(!!) That her Ministers are either ignorant of, or
indifferent to, the welfare of the State, and act from a passive
submission to her will, or from motives of party and private
interests."[18]


4. (MANUSCRIPT) ACCOUNT OF RUSSIA DURING THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE REIGN
OF THE EMPEROR PAUL, DRAWN UP BY THE REV. L. K. PITT, CHAPLAIN TO THE
FACTORY OF ST. PETERSBURG, AND A NEAR RELATIVE OF WILLIAM PITT.[19]

_Extract._


     "There can scarcely exist a doubt concerning the real sentiments of
     the late Empress of Russia on the great points which have, within
     the last few years, convulsed the whole system of European
     politics. She certainly felt from the beginning the fatal tendency
     of the new principles, but was not, perhaps, displeased to see
     every European Power exhausting itself in a struggle which raised,
     in proportion to its violence, her own importance. It is more than
     probable that the state of the newly acquired provinces in Poland
     was likewise a point which had considerable influence over the
     political conduct of Catherine. The fatal effects resulting from an
     apprehension of revolt in the late seat of conquest seem to have
     been felt in a very great degree by the combined Powers, who in the
     early period of the Revolution were so near reinstating the regular
     Government in France. The same dread of revolt in Poland, which
     divided the attention of the combined Powers and hastened their
     retreat, deterred likewise the late Empress of Russia from entering
     on the great theatre of war, until a combination of circumstances
     rendered the progress of the French armies a more dangerous evil
     than any which could possibly result to the Russian Empire from
     active operations.... The last words which the Empress was known to
     utter were addressed to her Secretary when she dismissed him on the
     morning on which she was seized: 'Tell Prince' (Zuboff), she said,
     'to come to me at twelve, and to remind me of signing the Treaty of
     Alliance with England.'"


Having entered into ample considerations on the Emperor Paul's acts and
extravagances, the Rev. Mr. Pitt continues as follows:


     "When these considerations are impressed on the mind, the nature of
     the late secession from the coalition, and of the incalculable
     indignities offered to the Government of Great Britain, can alone
     be fairly estimated.... BUT THE TIES WHICH BIND HER (GREAT BRITAIN)
     TO THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE ARE FORMED BY NATURE, AND INVIOLABLE. United,
     these nations might almost brave the united world; divided, the
     strength and importance of each is FUNDAMENTALLY impaired. England
     has reason to regret with Russia that the imperial sceptre should
     be thus inconsistently wielded, but it is the sovereign of Russia
     alone who divides the Empires."


The reverend gentleman concludes his account by the words:


     "As far as human foresight can at this moment penetrate, the
     despair of an enraged individual seems a more probable means to
     terminate the present scene of oppression than any more systematic
     combination of measures to restore the throne of Russia to its
     dignity and importance."


FOOTNOTES:

[1] This letter relates to the war against Turkey, commenced by the
Empress Ann in 1735. The British diplomatist at St. Petersburg is
reporting about his endeavours to induce Russia to conclude peace with
the Turks. The passages omitted are irrelevant.

[2] England was at that time negotiating a commercial treaty with
Russia.

[3] To this time it has remained among historians a point of
controversy, whether or not Panin was in the pay of Frederick II. of
Prussia, and whether he was so behind the back of Catherine, or at her
bidding. There can exist no doubt that Catherine II., in order to
identify foreign Courts with Russian Ministers, allowed Russian
Ministers ostensibly to identify themselves with foreign Courts. As to
Panin in particular, the question is, however, decided by an authentic
document which we believe has never been published. It proves that,
having once become the man of Frederick II., he was forced to remain so
at the risk of his honour, fortune and life.

[4] The Russian Minister at London.

[5] The oligarchic Constitution set up by the Senate after the death of
Charles XII.

[6] Thus we learn from Sir George Macartney that what is commonly known
as Lord Chatham's "grand conception of the Northern Alliance," was, in
fact, Panin's "grand scheme of uniting the Powers of the North." Chatham
was duped into fathering the Muscovite plan.

[7] The compact between the Bourbons of France and Spain concluded at
Paris on August, 1761.

[8] This was a subterfuge on the part of Frederick II. The manner in
which Frederick was forced into the arms of the Russian Alliance is
plainly told by M. Koch, the French professor of diplomacy and teacher
of Talleyrand. "Frederick II.," he says, "having been abandoned by the
Cabinet of London, could not but attach himself to Russia." (See his
_History of the Revolutions in Europe_.)

[9] Horace Walpole characterises his epoch by the words--"_It was the
mode of the times to be paid by one favour for receiving another._" At
all events, it will be seen from the text that such was the mode of
Russia in transacting business with England. The Earl of Sandwich, to
whom Sir George Macartney could dare to address the above despatch,
distinguished himself, ten years later, in 1775, as First Lord of the
Admiralty, in the North Administration, by the vehement opposition he
made to Lord Chatham's motion for an equitable _adjustment of the
American difficulties_. "He could not believe it (Chatham's motion) _the
production of a British peer_; it appeared to him rather _the work of
some American_." In 1777, we find Sandwich again blustering: "he would
hazard every drop of blood, as well as the last shilling of the national
treasure, rather than allow Great Britain to be defied, bullied, and
dictated to, by her disobedient and rebellious subjects." Foremost as
the Earl of Sandwich was in entangling England in war with her North
American colonies, with France, Spain, and Holland, we behold him
constantly accused in Parliament by Fox, Burke, Pitt, etc., "of keeping
the naval force inadequate to the defence of the country; of
intentionally opposing small English forces where he knew the enemy to
have concentrated large ones; of utter mismanagement of the service in
all its departments," etc. (See debates of the House of Commons of 11th
March, 1778; 31st March, 1778; February, 1779; Fox's motion of censure
on Lord Sandwich; 9th April, 1779, address to the King for the dismissal
of Lord Sandwich from his service, on account of misconduct in service;
7th February, 1782, Fox's motion that there had been gross mismanagement
in the administration of naval affairs during the year 1781.) On this
occasion Pitt imputed to Lord Sandwich "all our naval disasters and
disgraces." The ministerial majority against the motion amounted to only
22 in a House of 388. On the 22nd February, 1782, a similar motion
against Lord Sandwich was only negatived by a majority of 19 in a House
of 453. Such, indeed, was the character of the Earl of Sandwich's
Administration that more than thirty distinguished officers quitted the
naval service, or declared they could not act under the existing system.
In point of fact, during his whole tenure of office, serious
apprehensions were entertained of the consequences of the dissensions
then prevalent in the navy. Besides, the Earl of Sandwich was openly
accused, and, as far as circumstantial evidence goes, convicted of
PECULATION. (See debates of the House of Lords, 31st March, 1778; 9th
April, 1779, and _seq._) When the motion for his removal from office was
negatived on April 9th 1779, thirty-nine peers entered their protest.

[10] Sir James Harris affects to believe that Catherine II. was not the
author of, but a convert to, the armed neutrality of 1780. It is one of
the grand stratagems of the Court of St. Petersburg to give to its own
schemes the form of proposals suggested to and pressed on itself by
foreign Courts. Russian diplomacy delights in those _quæ pro quo_. Thus
the Court of Florida Bianca was made the responsible editor of the armed
neutrality, and, from a report that vain-glorious Spaniard addressed to
Carlos III., one may see how immensely he felt flattered at the idea of
having not only hatched the armed neutrality but allured Russia into
abetting it.

[11] This same Sir James Harris, perhaps more familiar to the reader
under the name of the Earl of Malmesbury, is extolled by English
historians as the man who prevented England from surrendering the right
of search in the Peace Negotiations of 1782-83.

[12] It might be inferred from this passage and similar ones occurring
in the text, that Catherine II. had caught a real Tartar in Lord North,
whose Administration Sir James Harris is pointing at. Any such delusion
will disappear before the simple statement that the first partition of
Poland took place under Lord North's Administration, without any protest
on his part. In 1773 Catherine's war against Turkey still continuing,
and her conflicts with Sweden growing serious, France made preparations
to send a powerful fleet into the Baltic. D'Aiguillon, the French
Minister of Foreign Affairs, communicated this plan to Lord Stormont,
the then English Ambassador at Paris. In a long conversation,
D'Aiguillon dwelt largely on the ambitious designs of Russia, and the
common interest that ought to blend France and England into a joint
resistance against them. In answer to this confidential communication,
he was informed by the English Ambassador that, "if France sent her
ships into the Baltic, they would instantly be followed by a British
fleet; that the presence of two fleets would have no more effect than a
neutrality; and however the British Court might desire to preserve the
harmony now subsisting between England and France, it was impossible to
foresee the contingencies that might arise from accidental collision."
In consequence of these representations, D'Aiguillon countermanded the
squadron at Brest, but gave new orders for the equipment of an armament
at Toulon. "On receiving intelligence of these renewed preparations, the
British Cabinet made instant and vigorous demonstrations of resistance;
Lord Stormont was ordered to declare that every argument used respecting
the Baltic applied equally to the Mediterranean. A memorial also was
presented to the French Minister, accompanied by a demand that it should
be laid before the King and Council. This produced the desired effect;
the armament was countermanded, the sailors disbanded, and the chances
of an extensive warfare avoided."

"_Lord North_," says the complacent writer from whom we have borrowed
the last lines, "_thus effectually served the cause of his ally_
(Catherine II.), _and facilitated the treaty of peace_ (of
Kutchuk-Kainardji) _between Russia and the Porte_." Catherine II.
rewarded Lord North's good services, first by withholding the aid she
had promised him in case of a war between England and the North American
Colonies, and in the second place, by conjuring up and leading the armed
neutrality against England. Lord North DARED NOT _repay, as he was
advised by Sir James Harris_, this treacherous breach of faith by giving
up to Russia, and to _Russia alone_, the maritime rights of Great
Britain. Hence the irritation in the nervous system of the Czarina; the
hysterical fancy she caught all at once of "entertaining a bad opinion"
of Lord North, of "disliking" him, of feeling a "rooted aversion"
against him, of being afflicted with "a total want of confidence," etc.
In order to give the Shelburne Administration a warning example, Sir
James Harris draws up a minute psychological picture of the feelings of
the Czarina, and the disgrace incurred by the North Administration, for
having wounded these same feelings. His prescription is very simple:
surrender to Russia, as our friend, everything for asking which we would
consider every other Power our enemy.

[13] It is then a fact that the English Government, not satisfied with
having made Russia a Baltic power, strove hard to make her a
Mediterranean power too. The offer of the surrender of Minorca appears
to have been made to Catherine II. at the end of 1779, or the beginning
of 1780, shortly after Lord Stormont's entrance into the North
Cabinet--the same Lord Stormont we have seen thwarting the French
attempts at resistance against Russia, and whom even Sir James Harris
cannot deny the merit of having written "_instructions perfectly
calculated to the meridian of the Court of St. Petersburg_." While Lord
North's Cabinet, at the suggestion of Sir James Harris, offered Minorca
to the _Muscovites_, the English Commoners and people were still
trembling for fear lest the _Hanoverians_ (?) should wrest out of their
hands "one of the keys of the Mediterranean." On the 26th of October,
1775, the King, in his opening speech, had informed Parliament, amongst
other things, that he had Sir James Graham's own words, when asked why
they should not have kept up some blockade pending the settlement of the
"plan," "_They did not take that responsibility upon themselves._" The
responsibility of executing their orders! The despatch we have quoted is
the only despatch read, except one of a later date. The despatch, said
to be sent on the 5th of April, in which "the Admiral is ordered to use
the _largest discretionary power_ in blockading the Russian ports in the
Black Sea," is not read, nor any replies from Admiral Dundas. The
Admiralty sent _Hanoverian_ troops to Gibraltar and Port Mahon
(Minorca), to replace such British regiments as should be drawn from
those garrisons for service in America. An amendment to the address was
proposed by Lord John Cavendish, strongly condemning "the confiding
_such important fortresses as Gibraltar and Port Mahon to foreigners_."
After very stormy debates, in which the measure of entrusting Gibraltar
and Minorca, "_the keys of the Mediterranean_," as they were called, to
_foreigners_, was furiously attacked; Lord North, acknowledging himself
the adviser of the measure, felt obliged to bring in a _bill of
indemnity_. However, these foreigners, these Hanoverians, were the
English King's own subjects. Having virtually surrendered Minorca to
Russia in 1780, Lord North was, of course, quite justified in treating,
on November 22, 1781, in the House of Commons, "with utter scorn the
insinuation that _Ministers were in the pay of France_."

Let us remark, _en passant_, that Lord North, one of the most base and
mischievous Ministers England can boast of, perfectly mastered the art
of keeping the House in perpetual laughter. So had Lord Sunderland. So
has Lord Palmerston.

[14] Lord North having been supplanted by the Rockingham Administration,
on March 27, 1782, the celebrated Fox forwarded peace proposals to
Holland through the mediation of the _Russian_ Minister. Now what were
the consequences of the _Russian mediation_ so much vaunted by this Sir
James Harris, the servile account keeper of the Czarina's sentiments,
humours, and feelings? While preliminary articles of peace had been
convened with France, Spain, and the American States, it was found
impossible to arrive at any such preliminary agreement with Holland.
Nothing but a simple cessation of hostilities was to be obtained from
it. So powerful proved the _Russian mediation_, that on the 2nd
September, 1783, just one day before the conclusion of _definitive
treaties_ with America, France, and Spain, Holland condescended to
accede to _preliminaries of peace_, and this not in consequence of the
_Russian mediation_, but through the influence of _France_.

[15] How much was England not prejudiced by the Courts of Vienna and
Paris thwarting the plan of the British Cabinet of ceding Minorca to
Russia, and by Frederick of Prussia's resistance against the great
Chatham's scheme of a Northern Alliance under Muscovite auspices.

[16] The predecessor is Fox. Sir James Harris establishes a complete
scale of British Administrations, according to the degree in which they
enjoyed the favour of his almighty Czarina. In spite of Lord Stormont,
the Earl of Sandwich, Lord North, and Sir James Harris himself; in spite
of the partition of Poland, the bullying of D'Aiguillon, the treaty of
Kutchuk-Kainardji, and the intended cession of Minorca--Lord North's
Administration is relegated to the bottom of the heavenly ladder; far
above it has climbed the Rockingham Administration, whose soul was Fox,
notorious for his subsequent intrigues with Catherine; but at the top we
behold the Shelburne Administration, whose Chancellor of the Exchequer
was the celebrated William Pitt. As to Lord Shelburne himself, Burke
exclaimed in the House of Commons, that "if he was not a Catalina or
Borgia in morals, it must not be ascribed to anything but his
understanding."

[17] Sir James Harris forgets deducing the main inference, that the
Ambassador of England is the agent of Russia.

[18] In the 18th century, English diplomatists' despatches, bearing on
their front the sacramental inscription, "Private," are despatches to be
withheld from the King by the Minister to whom they are addressed. That
such was the case may be seen from Lord Mahon's _History of England_.

[19] "To be burnt after my death." Such are the words prefixed to the
manuscript by the gentleman whom it was addressed to.




CHAPTER II


The documents published in the first chapter extend from the reign of
the Empress Ann to the commencement of the reign of the Emperor Paul,
thus encompassing the greater part of the 18th century. At the end of
that century it had become, as stated by the Rev. Mr. Pitt, the openly
professed and orthodox dogma of English diplomacy, "_that the ties which
bind Great Britain to the Russian Empire are formed by nature, and
inviolable_."

In perusing these documents, there is something that startles us even
more than their contents--viz., their form. All these letters are
"confidential," "private," "secret," "most secret"; but in spite of
secrecy, privacy, and confidence, the English statesmen converse among
each other about Russia and her rulers in a tone of awful reserve,
abject servility, and cynical submission, which would strike us even in
the public despatches of Russian statesmen. To conceal intrigues against
foreign nations secrecy is recurred to by Russian diplomatists. The same
method is adopted by English diplomatists freely to express their
devotion to a foreign Court. The secret despatches of Russian
diplomatists are fumigated with some equivocal perfume. It is one part
the _fumée de fausseté_, as the Duke of St. Simon has it, and the other
part that coquettish display of one's own superiority and cunning which
stamps upon the reports of the French Secret Police their indelible
character. Even the master despatches of Pozzo di Borgo are tainted with
this common blot of the _litérature de mauvais lieu_. In this point the
English secret despatches prove much superior. They do not affect
superiority but silliness. For instance, can there be anything more
silly than Mr. Rondeau informing Horace Walpole that he has betrayed to
the Russian Minister the letters addressed by the Turkish Grand Vizier
to the King of England, but that he had told "at the same time those
gentlemen that as there were several hard reflections on the Russian
Court he should not have communicated them, _if they had not been so
anxious to see them_," and then told their excellencies not to tell the
Porte that they had seen them (those letters)! At first view the infamy
of the act is drowned in the silliness of the man. Or, take Sir George
Macartney. Can there be anything more silly than his happiness that
Russia seemed "reasonable" enough not to expect that England "should pay
the WHOLE EXPENSES" for Russia's "choosing to take the lead at
Stockholm"; or his "flattering himself" that he had "persuaded the
Russian Court" not to be so "unreasonable" as to ask from England, in a
time of peace, subsidies for a time of war against Turkey (then the ally
of England); or his warning the Earl of Sandwich "not to mention" to the
Russian Ambassador at London the secrets mentioned to himself by the
Russian Chancellor at St. Petersburg? Or can there be anything more
silly than Sir James Harris confidentially whispering into the ear of
Lord Grantham that Catherine II. was devoid of "judgment, precision of
idea, reflection, and _l'esprit de combinaison_"?[20]

On the other hand, take the cool impudence with which Sir George
Macartney informs his minister that because the Swedes were extremely
jealous of, and mortified at, their dependence on Russia, England was
directed by the Court of St. Petersburg to do its work at Stockholm,
under the British colours of liberty and independence! Or Sir James
Harris advising England to surrender to Russia Minorca and the right of
search, and the monopoly of mediation in the affairs of the world--not
in order to gain any material advantage, or even a formal engagement on
the part of Russia, but only "a strong glow of friendship" from the
Empress, and the transfer to France of her "ill humour."

The secret Russian despatches proceed on the very plain line that
Russia knows herself to have no common interests whatever with other
nations, but that every nation must be persuaded separately to have
common interests with Russia to the exclusion of every other nation. The
English despatches, on the contrary, never dare so much as hint that
Russia has common interests with England, but only endeavour to convince
England that she has Russian interests. The English diplomatists
themselves tell us that this was the single argument they pleaded, when
placed face to face with Russian potentates.

If the English despatches we have laid before the public were addressed
to private friends, they would only brand with infamy the ambassadors
who wrote them. Secretly addressed as they are to the British Government
itself, they nail it for ever to the pillory of history; and,
instinctively, this seems to have been felt, even by Whig writers,
because none has dared to publish them.

The question naturally arises from which epoch this Russian character of
English diplomacy, become traditionary in the course of the 18th
century, does date its origin. To clear up this point we must go back to
the time of Peter the Great, which, consequently, will form the
principal subject of our researches. We propose to enter upon this task
by reprinting some English pamphlets, written at the time of Peter I.,
and which have either escaped the attention of modern historians, or
appeared to them to merit none. However, they will suffice for refuting
the prejudice common to Continental and English writers, that the
designs of Russia were not understood or suspected in England until at a
later, and too late, epoch; that the diplomatic relations between
England and Russia were but the natural offspring of the mutual material
interests of the two countries; and that, therefore, in accusing the
British statesmen of the 18th century of Russianism we should commit an
unpardonable hysteron-proteron. If we have shown by the English
despatches that, at the time of the Empress Ann, England already
betrayed her own allies to Russia, it will be seen from the pamphlets we
are now about to reprint that, even before the epoch of Ann, at the
very epoch of Russian ascendency in Europe, springing up at the time of
Peter I., the plans of Russia were understood, and the connivance of
British statesmen at these plans was denounced by English writers.

The first pamphlet we lay before the public is called _The Northern
Crisis_. It was printed in London in 1716, and relates to the intended
Dano-Anglo-Russian _invasion of Skana_ (Schonen).

During the year 1715 a northern alliance for the partition, not of
Sweden proper, but of what we may call the Swedish Empire, had been
concluded between Russia, Denmark, Poland, Prussia, and Hanover. That
partition forms the first grand act of modern diplomacy--the logical
premiss to the partition of Poland. The partition treaties relating to
Spain have engrossed the interest of posterity because they were the
forerunners of the War of Succession, and the partition of Poland drew
even a larger audience because its last act was played upon a
contemporary stage. However, it cannot be denied that it was the
partition of the Swedish Empire which inaugurated the modern era of
international policy. The partition treaty not even pretended to have a
pretext, save the misfortune of its intended victim. For the first time
in Europe the violation of all treaties was not only made, but
proclaimed the common basis of a new treaty. Poland herself, in the drag
of Russia, and personated by that commonplace of immorality, Augustus
II., Elector of Saxony and King of Poland, was pushed into the
foreground of the conspiracy, thus signing her own death-warrant, and
not even enjoying the privilege reserved by Polyphemus to Odysseus--to
be last eaten. Charles XII. predicted her fate in the manifesto flung
against King Augustus and the Czar, from his voluntary exile at Bender.
The manifesto is dated January 28, 1711.

The participation in this partition treaty threw England within the
orbit of Russia, towards whom, since the days of the "Glorious
Revolution," she had more and more gravitated. George I., as King of
England, was bound to a defensive alliance with Sweden by the treaty of
1700. Not only as King of England, but as Elector of Hanover, he was
one of the guarantees, and even of the direct parties to the treaty of
Travendal, which secured to Sweden what the partition treaty intended
stripping her of. Even his German electoral dignity he partly owed to
that treaty. However, as Elector of Hanover he declared war against
Sweden, which he waged as King of England.

In 1715 the confederates had divested Sweden of her German provinces,
and to effect that end introduced the Muscovite on the German soil. In
1716 they agreed to invade Sweden Proper--to attempt an armed descent
upon Schonen--the southern extremity of Sweden now constituting the
districts of Malmoe and Christianstadt. Consequently Peter of Russia
brought with him from Germany a Muscovite army, which was scattered over
Zealand, thence to be conveyed to Schonen, under the protection of the
English and Dutch fleets sent into the Baltic, on the false pretext of
protecting trade and navigation. Already in 1715, when Charles XII. was
besieged in Stralsund, eight English men-of-war, lent by England to
Hanover, and by Hanover to Denmark, had openly reinforced the Danish
navy, and even hoisted the Danish flag. In 1716 the British navy was
commanded by his Czarish Majesty in person.

Everything being ready for the invasion of Schonen, there arose a
difficulty from a side where it was least expected. Although the treaty
stipulated only for 30,000 Muscovites, Peter, in his magnanimity, had
landed 40,000 on Zealand; but now that he was to send them on the errand
to Schonen, he all at once discovered that out of the 40,000 he could
spare but 15,000. This declaration not only paralysed the military plan
of the confederates, it seemed to threaten the security of Denmark and
of Frederick IV., its king, as great part of the Muscovite army,
supported by the Russian fleet, occupied Copenhagen. One of the generals
of Frederick proposed suddenly to fall with the Danish cavalry upon the
Muscovites and to exterminate them, while the English men-of-war should
burn the Russian fleet. Averse to any perfidy which required some
greatness of will, some force of character, and some contempt of
personal danger, Frederick IV. rejected the bold proposal, and limited
himself to assuming an attitude of defence. He then wrote a begging
letter to the Czar, intimating that he had given up his Schonen fancy,
and requested the Czar to do the same and find his way home: a request
the latter could not but comply with. When Peter at last left Denmark
with his army, the Danish Court thought fit to communicate to the Courts
of Europe a public account of the incidents and transactions which had
frustrated the intended descent upon Schonen--and this document forms
the starting point of _The Northern Crisis_.

In a letter addressed to Baron Görtz, dated from London, January 23,
1717, by Count Gyllenborg, there occur some passages in which the
latter, the then Swedish ambassador at the Court of St. James's, seems
to profess himself the author of _The Northern Crisis_, the title of
which he does not, however, quote. Yet any idea of his having written
that powerful pamphlet will disappear before the slightest perusal of
the Count's authenticated writings, such as his letters to Görtz.


"THE NORTHERN CRISIS; OR IMPARTIAL REFLECTIONS ON THE POLICIES OF THE
CZAR; OCCASIONED BY MYNHEER VON STOCKEN'S REASONS FOR DELAYING THE
DESCENT UPON SCHONEN. A TRUE COPY OF WHICH IS PREFIXED, VERBALLY
TRANSLATED AFTER THE TENOR OF THAT IN THE GERMAN SECRETARY'S OFFICE IN
COPENHAGEN, OCTOBER 10, 1716. LONDON, 1716.

1.--_Preface_---- ... 'Tis (the present pamphlet) not fit for lawyers'
clerks, but it is highly convenient to be read by those who are proper
students in the laws of nations; 'twill be but lost time for any
stock-jobbing, trifling dealer in Exchange-Alley to look beyond the
preface on't, but every merchant in England (more especially those who
trade to the Baltic) will find his account in it. The Dutch (as the
courants and postboys have more than once told us) are about to mend
their hands, if they can, in several articles of trade with the Czar,
and they have been a long time about it to little purpose. Inasmuch as
they are such a frugal people, they are good examples for the imitation
of our traders; but if we can outdo them for once, in the means of
projecting a better and more expeditious footing to go upon, for the
emolument of us both, let us, for once, be wise enough to set the
example, and let them, for once, be our imitators. This little treatise
will show a pretty plain way how we may do it, as to our trade in the
Baltic, at this juncture. I desire no little _coffee-house politician_
to meddle with it; but to give him even a disrelish for my company. I
must let him know that he is not fit for mine. Those who are even
proficients in state science, will find in it matter highly fit to
employ all their powers of speculation, which they ever before past
negligently by, and thought (too cursorily) were not worth the
regarding. No outrageous party-man will find it at all for his purpose;
but every _honest Whig_ and every _honest Tory_ may each of them read
it, not only without either of their disgusts, but with the satisfaction
of them both.... 'Tis not fit, in fine, for a mad, hectoring,
Presbyterian Whig, or a raving, fretful, dissatisfied, Jacobite Tory."


2.--THE REASONS HANDED ABOUT BY MYNHEER VON STOCKEN FOR DELAYING THE
DESCENT UPON SCHONEN.

"There being no doubt, but most courts will be surprised that the
descent upon Schonen has not been put into execution, notwithstanding
the great preparations made for that purpose; and that all his Czarish
Majesty's troops, who were in Germany, were transported to Zealand, not
without great trouble and danger, partly by his own gallies, and partly
by his Danish Majesty's and other vessels; and that the said descent is
deferred till another time. His Danish Majesty hath therefore, in order
to clear himself of all imputation and reproach, thought fit to order,
that the following true account of this affair should be given to all
impartial persons. Since the Swedes were entirely driven out of their
_German_ dominions, there was, according to all the rules of policy, and
reasons of war, no other way left, than vigorously to attack the still
obstinate King of Sweden, in the very heart of his country; thereby,
with God's assistance, to force him to a lasting, good and advantageous
peace for the allies. The King of Denmark and his Czarish Majesty were
both of this opinion, and did, in order to put so good a design in
execution, agree upon an interview, which at last (notwithstanding his
Danish Majesty's presence, upon the account of Norway's being invaded,
was most necessary in his own capital, and that the Muscovite
ambassador, M. Dolgorouky, had given quite other assurances) was held at
Ham and Horn, near Hamburgh, after his Danish Majesty had stayed there
six weeks for the Czar. In this conference it was, on the 3rd of June,
agreed between both their Majesties, after several debates, that the
descent upon Schonen should positively be undertaken this year, and
everything relating to the forwarding the same was entirely consented
to. Hereupon his Danish Majesty made all haste for his return to his
dominions, and gave orders to work day and night to get his fleet ready
to put to sea. The transport ships were also gathered from all parts of
his dominions, both with inexpressible charges and great prejudice to
his subjects' trade. Thus, his Majesty (as the Czar himself upon his
arrival at Copenhagen owned) did his utmost to provide all necessaries,
and to forward the descent, upon whose success everything depended. It
happened, however, in the meanwhile, and before the descent was agreed
upon in the conference at Ham and Horn, that his Danish Majesty was
obliged to secure his invaded and much oppressed kingdom of Norway, by
sending thither a considerable squadron out of his fleet, under the
command of Vice-Admiral Gabel, which squadron could not be recalled
before the enemy had left that kingdom, without endangering a great part
thereof; so that out of necessity the said Vice-Admiral was forced to
tarry there till the 12th of July, when his Danish Majesty sent him
express orders to return with all possible speed, wind and weather
permitting; but this blowing for some time contrary, he was
detained.... The Swedes were all the while powerful at sea, and his
Czarish Majesty himself did not think it advisable that the remainder of
the Danish, in conjunction with the men-of-war then at Copenhagen,
should go to convoy the Russian troops from Rostock, before the
above-mentioned squadron under Vice-Admiral Gabel was arrived. This
happening at last in the month of August, the confederate fleet put to
sea; and the transporting of the said troops hither to Zealand was put
in execution, though with a great deal of trouble and danger, but it
took up so much time that the descent could not be ready till September
following. Now, when all these preparations, as well for the descent as
the embarking the armies, were entirely ready, his Danish Majesty
assured himself that the descent should be made within a few days, at
farthest by the 21st of September. The Russian Generals and Ministers
first raised some difficulties to those of Denmark, and afterwards, on
the 17th September, declared in an appointed conference, that his
Czarish Majesty, considering the present situation of affairs, was of
opinion that neither forage nor provision could be had in Schonen, and
that consequently the descent was not advisable to be attempted this
year, but ought to be put off till next spring. It may easily be
imagined how much his Danish Majesty was surprised at this; especially
seeing the Czar, if he had altered his opinion, as to this design so
solemnly concerted, might have declared it sooner, and thereby saved his
Danish Majesty several tons of gold, spent upon the necessary
preparations. His Danish Majesty did, however, in a letter dated the
20th of September, amply represent to the Czar, that although the season
was very much advanced, the descent might, nevertheless, easily be
undertaken with such a superior force, as to get a footing in Schonen,
where being assured there had been a very plentiful harvest, he did not
doubt but subsistence might be found; besides, that having an open
communication with his own countries, it might easily be transported
from thence. His Danish Majesty alleged also several weighty reasons why
the descent was either to be made this year, or the thoughts of making
it next spring entirely be laid aside. _Nor did he alone make these
moving remonstrances to the Czar_; BUT HIS BRITISH MAJESTY'S MINISTER
RESIDING HERE, AS WELL AS ADMIRAL NORRIS, _seconded the same also in a
very pressing manner_; AND BY EXPRESS ORDER OF THE KING, THEIR MASTER,
_endeavoured to bring the Czar into their opinion, and to persuade him
to go on with the descent_; but his Czarish Majesty declared by his
answer, that he would adhere to the resolution that he had once taken
concerning this delay of making the descent; but if his Danish Majesty
was resolved to venture on the descent, that he then, according to the
treaty made near Straelsund, would assist him only with the 15
battalions and 1,000 horse therein stipulated; that next spring he would
comply with everything else, and neither could or would declare himself
farther in this affair. Since then, his Danish Majesty could not,
without running so great a hazard, undertake so great a work alone with
his own army and the said 15 battalions; he desired, in another letter
of the 23rd September, his Czarish Majesty would be pleased to add 13
battalions of his troops, in which case his Danish Majesty would still
this year attempt the descent; but even this could not be obtained from
his Czarish Majesty, who absolutely refused it by his ambassador on the
24th ditto: whereupon his Danish Majesty, in his letter of the 26th,
declared to the Czar, that since things stood thus, he desired none of
his troops, but that they might be all speedily transported out of his
dominions; that so the transport, whose freight stood him in 40,000 rix
dollars per month, might be discharged, and his subjects eased of the
intolerable contributions they now underwent. This he could not do less
than agree to; and accordingly, all the Russian troops are already
embarked, and intend for certain to go from here with the first
favourable wind. It must be left to Providence and time, to discover
what may have induced the Czar to a resolution so prejudicial to the
Northern Alliance, and most advantageous to the common enemy.

If we would take a true survey of men, and lay them open in a proper
light to the eye of our intellects, _we must_ first _consider their
natures_ and then _their ends_; and by this method of examination,
though their conduct is, seemingly, full of intricate mazes and
perplexities, and winding round with infinite meanders of state-craft,
we shall be able to dive into the deepest recesses, make our way through
the most puzzling labyrinths, and at length come to the most abstruse
means of bringing about the master secrets of their minds, and to
unriddle their utmost mysteries.... The Czar ... is, by nature, of a
great and enterprising spirit, and of a genius thoroughly politic; and
as for his ends, the manner of his own Government, where he sways
arbitrary lord over the estates and honours of his people, must make
him, if all the policies in the world could by far-distant aims promise
him accession and accumulation of empire and wealth, be everlastingly
laying schemes for the achieving of both with the extremest cupidity and
ambition. Whatever ends an insatiate desire of opulency, and a boundless
thirst for dominion, can ever put him upon, to satisfy their craving and
voracious appetites, those must, most undoubtedly, be his.

The next questions we are to put to ourselves are these three:

1. By what means can he gain these ends?

2. How far from him, and in what place, can these ends be best obtained?

3. And by what time, using all proper methods and succeeding in them,
may he obtain these ends?

The possessions of the Czar were prodigious, vast in extent; the people
all at his nod, all his downright arrant slaves, and all the wealth of
the country his own at a word's command. But then the country, though
large in ground, was not quite so in produce. Every vassal had his gun,
and was to be a soldier upon call; but there was never a soldier among
them, nor a man that understood the calling; and though he had all their
wealth, they had no commerce of consequence, and little ready money; and
consequently his treasury, when he had amassed all he could, very bare
and empty. He was then but in an indifferent condition to satisfy those
two natural appetites, when he had neither wealth to support a
soldiery, nor a soldiery trained in the art of war. The first token this
Prince gave of an aspiring genius, and of an ambition that is noble and
necessary in a monarch who has a mind to flourish, was to believe none
of his subjects more wise than himself, or more fit to govern. He did
so, and looked upon his own proper person as the most fit to travel out
among the other realms of the world and study politics for the advancing
of his dominions. He then seldom pretended to any warlike dispositions
against those who were instructed in the science of arms; his military
dealings lay mostly with the Turks and Tartars, who, as they had numbers
as well as he, had them likewise composed, as well as his, of a rude,
uncultivated mob, and they appeared in the field like a raw,
undisciplined militia. In this his Christian neighbours liked him well,
insomuch as he was a kind of stay or stopgap to the infidels. But when
he came to look into the more polished parts of the Christian world, he
set out towards it, from the very threshold, like a natural-born
politician. He was not for learning the game by trying chances and
venturing losses in the field so soon; no, he went upon the maxim _that
it was, at that time of day, expedient and necessary for him to carry,
like Samson, his strength in his head, and not in his arms_. He had
then, he knew, but very few commodious places for commerce of his own,
and those all situated in the _White Sea_, too remote, frozen up the
most part of the year, and not at all fit for a fleet of men-of-war; but
he knew of many more commodious ones of his neighbours in the Baltic,
and within his reach whenever he could strengthen his hands to lay hold
of them. He had a longing eye towards them; but with prudence seemingly
turned his head another way, and secretly entertained the pleasant
thought that he should come at them all in good time. Not to give any
jealousy, he endeavours for no help from his neighbours to instruct his
men in arms. That was like asking a skilful person, one intended to
fight a duel with, to teach him first how to fence. _He went over to
Great Britain_, where he knew that potent kingdom could, as yet, have no
jealousies of his growth of power, and in the eye of which his vast
extent of nation lay neglected and unconsidered and overlooked, as I am
afraid it is to this very day. He was present at all our exercises,
looked into all our laws, inspected our military, civil, and
ecclesiastical regimen of affairs; yet this was the least he then
wanted; this was the slightest part of his errand. But by degrees, when
he grew familiar with our people, he visited our docks, pretending not
to have any prospect of profit, but only to take a huge delight (the
effect of curiosity only) to see our manner of building ships. He kept
his court, as one may say, in our shipyard, so industrious was he in
affording them his continual Czarish presence, and to his immortal glory
for art and industry be it spoken, that the great Czar, by stooping
often to the employ, could handle an axe with the best artificer of them
all; and the monarch having a good mathematical head of his own, grew in
some time a very expert royal shipwright. A ship or two for his
diversion made and sent him, and then two or three more, and after that
two or three more, would signify just nothing at all, if they were
granted to be sold to him by the _Maritime Powers_, that could, at will,
lord it over the sea. It would be a puny inconsiderable matter, and not
worth the regarding. Well, but then, over and above this, he had
artfully insinuated himself into the goodwill of many of our best
workmen, and won their hearts by his good-natured familiarities and
condescension among them. To turn this to his service, he offered many
very large premiums and advantages to go and settle in his country,
which they gladly accepted of. A little after he sends over some private
ministers and officers to negotiate for more workmen, for land officers,
and likewise for picked and chosen good seamen, who might be advanced
and promoted to offices by going there. Nay, even to this day, any
expert seaman that is upon our traffic to the port of Archangel, if he
has the least spark of ambition and any ardent desire to be in office,
he need but offer himself to the sea-service of the Czar, and he is a
lieutenant immediately. Over and above this, that Prince has even found
the way to take by force into his service out of our merchant ships as
many of their ablest seamen as he pleased, giving the masters the same
number of raw Muscovites in their place, whom they afterwards were
forced in their own defence to make fit for their own use. Neither is
this all; he had, during the last war, many hundreds of his subjects,
both noblemen and common sailors, on board _ours, the French and the
Dutch fleets_; and he has all along maintained, and still maintains
numbers of them in _ours and the Dutch yards_.

But seeing he looked all along upon all these endeavours towards
improving himself and his subjects as superfluous, whilst a seaport was
wanting, where he might build a fleet of his own, and from whence he
might himself export the products of his country, and import those of
others; and finding the King of Sweden possessed of the most convenient
ones, I mean Narva and Revel, which he knew that Prince never could nor
would amicably part with, he at last resolved to wrest them out of his
hands by force. His _Swedish_ Majesty's tender youth seemed the fittest
time for this enterprise, but even then he would not run the hazard
alone. He drew in other princes to divide the spoil with him. And the
_Kings of Denmark and Poland_ were weak enough to serve as instruments
to forward the great and ambitious views of the Czar. It is true, he met
with a mighty hard rub at his very first setting out; his whole army
being entirely defeated by a handful of Swedes at Narva. But it was his
good luck that his Swedish Majesty, instead of improving so great a
victory against him, turned immediately his arms against the King of
Poland, against whom he was personally piqued, and that so much the
more, inasmuch as he had taken that Prince for one of his best friends,
and was just upon the point of concluding with him the strictest
alliance when he unexpectedly invaded the Swedish Livonia, and besieged
Riga. This was, in all respects, what the Czar could most have wished
for; and foreseeing that the longer the war in Poland lasted, the more
time should he have both to retrieve his first loss, and to gain Narva,
he took care it should be spun out to as great a length as possible; for
which end he never sent the King of Poland succour enough to make him
too strong for the King of Sweden; who, on the other hand, though he
gained one signal victory after the other, yet never could subdue his
enemy as long as he received continual reinforcements from his
hereditary country. And had not his Swedish Majesty, contrary to most
people's expectations, marched directly into Saxony itself, and thereby
forced the King of Poland to peace, the Czar would have had leisure
enough in all conscience to bring his designs to greater maturity. This
peace was one of the greatest disappointments the Czar ever met with,
whereby he became singly engaged in the war. He had, however, the
comfort of having beforehand taken _Narva_, and laid a foundation to his
favourite town _Petersburg_, and to the seaport, the docks, and the vast
magazines there; all which works, to what perfection they are now
brought, let them tell who, with surprise, have seen them.

He (Peter) used all endeavours to bring matters to an accommodation. He
proffered very advantageous conditions; _Petersburg_ only, a trifle as
he pretended, which he had set his heart upon, he would retain; and even
for that he was willing some other way to give satisfaction. But the
King of Sweden was too well acquainted with the importance of that place
to leave it in the hands of an ambitious prince, and thereby to give him
an inlet into the Baltic. This was the only time since the defeat at
Narva that the Czar's arms had no other end than that of self-defence.
They might, perhaps, even have fallen short therein, had not the King of
Sweden (through whose persuasion is still a mystery), instead of
marching the shortest way to Novgorod and to Moscow, turned towards
Ukrain, where his army, after great losses and sufferings, was at last
entirely defeated at Pultowa. As this was a fatal period to the Swedish
successes, so how great a deliverance it was to the Muscovites, may be
gathered from the Czar's celebrating every year, with great solemnity,
the anniversary of that day, from which his ambitious thoughts began to
soar still higher. The whole of _Livonia_, _Estland_, and the best and
greatest part of _Finland_ was now what he demanded, after which,
though he might for the present condescend to give peace to the
remaining part of Sweden, he knew he could easily even add that to his
conquests whenever he pleased. The only obstacle he had to fear in these
his projects was from his northern neighbours; but as the _Maritime
Powers_, and even the neighbouring princes in Germany, were then so
intent upon their war against France, that they seemed entirely
neglectful of that of the North, so there remained only Denmark and
Poland to be jealous of. The former of these kingdoms had, ever since
King William, of glorious memory, compelled it to make peace with
Holstein and, consequently, with Sweden, enjoyed an uninterrupted
tranquillity, during which it had time, by a free trade and considerable
subsidies from the maritime powers to enrich itself, and was in a
condition, by joining itself to Sweden, as it was its interest to do, to
stop the Czar's progresses, and timely to prevent its own danger from
them. The other, I mean Poland, was now quietly under the government of
King Stanislaus, who, owing in a manner his crown to the King of Sweden,
could not, out of gratitude, as well as real concern for the interest of
his country, fail opposing the designs of a too aspiring neighbour. The
Czar was too cunning not to find out a remedy for all this: he
represented to the King of Denmark how low the King of Sweden was now
brought, and how fair an opportunity he had, during that Prince's long
absence, to clip entirely his wings, and to aggrandize himself at his
expense. In King Augustus he raised the long-hid resentment for the loss
of the Polish Crown, which he told him he might now recover without the
least difficulty. Thus both these Princes were immediately caught. The
Danes declared war against Sweden without so much as a tolerable
pretence, and made a descent upon Schonen, where they were soundly
beaten for their pains. King Augustus re-entered Poland, where
everything has ever since continued in the greatest disorder, and _that
in a great measure owing to Muscovite intrigues_. It happened, indeed,
that these new confederates, whom the Czar had only drawn in to serve
his ambition, became at first more necessary to his preservation than
he had thought; for the Turks having declared a war against him, they
hindered the Swedish arms from joining with them to attack him; but that
storm being soon over, through the Czar's wise behaviour and the avarice
and folly of the Grand Vizier, he then made the intended use both of
these his friends, as well as of them he afterwards, through hopes of
gain, persuaded into his alliance, which was to lay all the burthen and
hazard of the war upon them, in order entirely to weaken them, together
with Sweden, whilst _he was preparing himself to swallow the one after
the other_. He has put them on one difficult attempt after the other;
their armies have been considerably lessened by battles and long sieges,
whilst his own were either employed in easier conquests, and more
profitable to him, or kept at the vast expense of neutral princes--near
enough at hand to come up to demand a share of the booty without having
struck a blow in getting it. His behaviour has been as cunning at sea,
where his fleet has always kept out of harm's way and at a great
distance whenever there was any likelihood of an engagement between the
Danes and the Swedes. He hoped that when these two nations had ruined
one another's fleets, his might then ride master in the Baltic. All this
while he had taken care to make his men improve, by the example of
foreigners and under their command, in the art of war.... His fleets
will soon considerably outnumber the Swedish and the Danish ones joined
together. He need not fear their being a hindrance from his giving a
finishing stroke to this great and glorious undertaking. Which done,
_let us look to ourselves; he will then most certainly become our rival,
and as dangerous to us as he is now neglected_. We then may, perhaps,
though too late, call to mind what our own ministers and merchants have
told us of his designs of carrying on alone all the northern trade, and
of getting all that from Turkey and Persia into his hands through the
rivers which he is joining and making navigable from the Caspian, or the
Black Sea, to his Petersburg. _We shall then wonder at our blindness
that we did not suspect his designs_ when we heard the prodigious works
he has done at Petersburg and Revel; of which last place, the _Daily
Courant_, dated November 23, says:


     "HAGUE, _Nov. 17_.

     "The captains of the men-of-war of the States, who have been at
     Revel, advise that the Czar has put that port and the
     fortifications of the place into such a condition of defence that
     it may pass for one of the most considerable fortresses, not only
     of the Baltic, but even of Europe."


Leave we him now, as to his sea affairs, commerce and manufactures, and
other works both of his policy and power, and let us view him in regard
to his proceedings in this last campaign, especially as to that so much
talked of descent, he, in conjunction with his allies, was to make upon
Schonen, and we shall find that even therein he has acted with his usual
cunning. There is no doubt but the King of Denmark was the first that
proposed this descent. He found that nothing but a speedy end to a war
he had so rashly and unjustly begun, could save his country from ruin
and from the bold attempts of the King of Sweden, either against Norway,
or against Zealand and Copenhagen. To treat separately with that prince
was a thing he could not do, as foreseeing that he would not part with
an inch of ground to so unfair an enemy; and he was afraid that a
Congress for a general place, supposing the King of Sweden would consent
to it upon the terms proposed by his enemies, would draw the
negotiations out beyond what the situation of his affairs could bear. He
invites, therefore, all his confederates to make a home thrust at the
King of Sweden, by a descent into his country, where, having defeated
him, as by the superiority of the forces to be employed in that design
he hoped they should, they might force him to an immediate peace on such
terms as they themselves pleased. I don't know how far the rest of his
confederates came into that project; but neither the _Prussian_ nor the
_Hanoverian_ Court appeared _openly_ in that project, _and how far our
English fleet, under Sir John Norris, was to have forwarded it, I have
nothing to say, but leave others to judge out of the King of Denmark's
own declaration_: but the Czar came readily into it. He got thereby a
new pretence to carry the war one campaign more at other people's
expense; to march his troops into the Empire again, and to have them
quartered and maintained, first in Mecklenburg and then in Zealand. In
the meantime he had his eyes upon _Wismar_, and upon a Swedish island
called _Gotland_. If, by surprise, he could get the first out of the
hands of his confederates, he then had a good seaport, whither to
transport his troops when he pleased into _Germany_, without asking the
King of _Prussia's_ leave for a free passage through his territories;
and if, by a sudden descent, he could dislodge the _Swedes_ out of the
other, he then became master of the best port in the Baltic. He
miscarried, however, in both these projects; for Wismar was too well
guarded to be surprised; and he found his confederates would not give
him a helping hand towards conquering Gotland. After this he began to
look with another eye upon the descent to be made upon Schonen. He found
it equally contrary to his interest, whether it succeeded or not. For if
he did, and the King was thereby forced to a general peace, he knew his
interests therein would be least regarded; having already notice enough
of his confederates being ready to sacrifice them, provided they got
their own terms. If he did not succeed, then, besides the loss of the
flower of an army he had trained and disciplined with so much care, as
he very well foresaw that the English fleet would hinder the King of
Sweden from attempting anything against Denmark; so he justly feared the
whole shock would fall upon him, and he be thereby forced to surrender
all he had taken from Sweden. These considerations made him entirely
resolved not to make one of the descent; but he did not care to declare
it till as late as possible: first, that he might the longer have his
troops maintained at the Danish expense; secondly, that it might be too
late for the King of Denmark to demand the necessary troops from his
other confederates, and to make the descent without him; and, lastly,
that by putting the Dane to a vast expense in making necessary
preparations, he might still weaken him more, and, therefore, make him
now the more dependent on him, and hereafter a more easy prey.

Thus he very carefully dissembles his real thoughts, till just when the
descent was to be made, and then he, all of a sudden, refuses joining
it, and defers it till next spring, with this averment, _that he will
then be as good as his word_. But mark him, as some of our newspapers
tell us, under this restriction, _unless he can get an advantageous
peace of Sweden_. This passage, together with the common report we now
have of his treating a separate peace with the King of Sweden, is a new
instance of his cunning and policy. He has there two strings to his bow,
of which one must serve his turn. There is no doubt but the Czar knows
that an accommodation between him and the King of Sweden must be very
difficult to bring about. For as he, on the one side, should never
consent to part with those seaports, for the getting of which he began
this war, and which are absolutely necessary towards carrying on his
great and vast designs; so the King of Sweden would look upon it as
directly contrary to his interest to yield up these same seaports, if
possibly he could hinder it. But then again, the Czar is so well
acquainted with the great and heroic spirit of his Swedish Majesty, that
he does not question his yielding, rather in point of interest than
nicety of honour. From hence it is, he rightly judges, that his Swedish
Majesty must be less exasperated against him who, though he began an
unjust war, has very often paid dearly for it, and carried it on all
along through various successes than against some confederates; that
taking an opportunity of his Swedish Majesty's misfortunes, fell upon
him in an ungenerous manner, and made a partition treaty of his
provinces. The Czar, still more to accommodate himself to the genius of
his great enemy, unlike his confederates, who, upon all occasions,
spared no reflections and even very unbecoming ones (bullying memorials
and hectoring manifestoes), spoke all along with the utmost civility of
his brother Charles as he calls him, maintains him to be the greatest
general in Europe, and even publicly avers, he will more trust a word
from him than the greatest assurances, oaths, nay, even treaties with
his confederates. These kind of civilities may, perhaps, make a deeper
impression upon the noble mind of the King of Sweden, and he be
persuaded rather to sacrifice a real interest to a generous enemy, than
to gratify, in things of less moment, those by whom he has been ill, and
even inhumanly used. But if this should not succeed, the Czar is still a
gainer by having made his confederates uneasy at these his separate
negotiations; and as we find by the newspapers, the more solicitous to
keep him ready to their confederacy, which must cost them very large
proffers and promises. In the meantime he leaves the Dane and the Swede
securely bound up together in war, and weakening one another as fast as
they can, and he turns towards the Empire and views the Protestant
Princes there; and, under many specious pretences, not only marches and
counter-marches about their several territories his troops that came
back from Denmark, but makes also slowly advance towards Germany those
whom he has kept this great while in Poland, under pretence to help the
King against his dissatisfied subjects, whose commotions all the while
he was the greatest fomenter of. He considers the Emperor is in war with
the Turks, and therefore has found, by too successful experience, how
little his Imperial Majesty is able to show his authority in protecting
the members of the Empire. His troops remain in Mecklenburg,
notwithstanding their departure is highly insisted upon. His replies to
all the demands on that subject are filled with such reasons as if he
would give new laws to the Empire.

Now let us suppose that the King of Sweden should think it more
honourable to make a peace with the Czar, and to carry the force of his
resentment against his less generous enemies, what a stand will then the
princes of the empire, even those that unadvisedly drew in 40,000
Muscovites, to secure the tranquillity of that empire against 10,000 or
12,000 Swedes,--I say what stand will they be able to make against him
while the Emperor is already engaged in war with the Turks? and the
Poles, when they are once in peace among themselves (if after the
miseries of so long a war they are in a condition to undertake anything)
are by treaty obliged to join their aids against that common enemy of
Christianity.

Some will say I make great and sudden rises from very small beginnings.
My answer is, that I would have such an objector look back and reflect
why I show him, from such a speck of entity, at his first origin,
growing, through more improbable and almost insuperable difficulties, to
such a bulk as he has already attained to, and _whereby, as his
advocates, the Dutch themselves own, he is grown too formidable for the
repose, not only of his neighbours, but of Europe in general_.

But then, again, they will say he has no pretence either to make a peace
with the Swede separately from the Dane or to make war upon other
princes, some of whom he is bound in alliance with. Whoever thinks these
objections not answered must have considered the Czar neither as to his
nature or to his ends. The Dutch own further, _that he made war against
Sweden without any specious pretence_. He that made war without any
specious pretence may make a peace without any specious pretence, and
make a new war without any specious pretence for it too. His Imperial
Majesty (of Austria), like a wise Prince, when he was obliged to make
war with the Ottomans, made it, as in policy, he should, powerfully.
But, in the meantime, may not the Czar, who is a wise and potent Prince
too, follow the example upon the neighbouring Princes round him that are
Protestants? If he should, I tremble to speak it, it is not impossible,
but in this age of Christianity _the Protestant religion should, in a
great measure, be abolished_; and that among the Christians, the
_Greeks_ and _Romans_ may once more come to be the only Pretenders for
Universal Empire. The pure possibility carries with it warning enough
for the Maritime Powers, and all the other Protestant Princes, to
mediate a peace for Sweden, and strengthen his arms again, without which
no preparations can put them sufficiently upon their guard; and this
must be done early and betimes, _before the King of Sweden, either out
of despair or revenge, throws himself into the Czar's hands_. For 'tis a
certain maxim (which all Princes ought, and the Czar seems at this time
to observe too much for the repose of Christendom) that a wise man must
not stand for ceremony, and only _turn_ with opportunities. No, he must
even _run_ with them. For the Czar's part, I will venture to say so much
in his commendation, that he will hardly suffer himself to be overtaken
that way. He seems to act just as the tide serves. There is nothing
which contributes more to the making our undertakings prosperous than
the taking of times and opportunities; for time carrieth with it the
seasons of opportunities of business. If you let them slip, all your
designs are rendered unsuccessful.

In short, things seem now come to that _crisis_ that peace should as
soon as possible be procured to the Swede, with such advantageous
articles as are consistent with the nicety of his honour to accept, and
with the safety of the Protestant interest, that he should have offered
to him, which can be scarce less than all the possessions which he
formerly had in the Empire. As in all other things, so in politics, a
long-tried certainty must be preferred before an uncertainty, tho'
grounded on ever so probable suppositions. Now can there be anything
more certain, than that the provinces Sweden has had in the Empire, were
given to it to make it the nearer at hand and the better able to secure
the Protestant interest, which, together with the liberties of the
Empire it just then had saved? Can there be anything more certain than
that that kingdom has, by those means, upon all occasions, secured that
said interest now near fourscore years? Can there be anything more
certain than, as to his present Swedish Majesty, that I may use the
words of a letter her late Majesty, Queen Anne, wrote to him (Charles
XII.), and _in the time of a Whig Ministry too_, viz.: "That, as a true
Prince, hero and Christian, the chief end of his endeavours has been the
promotion of the fear of God among men: and that without insisting on
his own particular interest."

On the other hand, is it not very uncertain whether those princes, who,
by sharing among them the Swedish provinces in the Empire, are now going
to set up as protectors of the Protestant interests there, exclusive of
the Swedes, will be able to do it? _Denmark_ is already so low, and will
in all appearance be so much lower still before the end of the war,
that very little assistance can be expected from it in a great many
years. In _Saxony_, the prospect is but too dismal under a Popish
prince, so that there remain only the two illustrious houses of Hanover
and Brandenburg of all the Protestant princes, powerful enough to lead
the rest. Let us therefore only make a parallel between what now happens
in the Duchy of Mecklenburg, and what may happen to the Protestant
interest, and we shall soon find how we may be mistaken in our
reckoning. That said poor Duchy has been most miserably ruined by the
Muscovite troops, and it is still so; the Electors of Brandenburg and
Hanover are obliged, both as directors of the circle of Lower Saxony, as
neighbours, and Protestant Princes, to rescue a fellow state of the
Empire, and a Protestant country, from so cruel an oppression of a
foreign Power. But, pray, what have they done? The Elector of
Brandenburg, cautious lest the Muscovites might on one side invade his
electorate, and on the other side from Livonia and Poland, his kingdom
of Prussia; and the Elector of Hanover having the same wise caution as
to his hereditary countries, have not upon this, though very pressing
occasion, thought it for their interest, to use any other means than
representations. But pray with what success? The Muscovites are still in
Mecklenburg, and if at last they march out of it, it will be when the
country is so ruined that they cannot there subsist any longer.

It seems the King of Sweden should be restored to all that he has lost
on the side of the Czar; and this appears the _joint interest of both
the Maritime Powers_. This may they please to undertake: _Holland_,
because it is a maxim there "that the Czar grows too great, and must not
be suffered to settle in the Baltic, and that Sweden must not be
abandoned"; _Great Britain_, because, if the Czar compasses his vast and
prodigious views, he will, by the ruin and conquest of Sweden, become
our nearer and more dreadful neighbour. Besides, we are bound to it by a
treaty concluded in the year 1700, between King William and the present
King of Sweden, by virtue of which King William assisted the King of
Sweden, when in more powerful circumstances, with all that he desired,
with great sums of money, several hundred pieces of cloth, and
considerable quantities of gunpowder.

But _some Politicians (whom nothing can make jealous of the growing
strength and abilities of the Czar) though they are even foxes and
vulpones in the art, either will not see_ or _pretend they cannot see_
how the Czar can ever be able to make so great a progress in power as to
hurt us here in our island. To them it is easy to repeat the same answer
a hundred times over, if they would be so kind as to take it at last,
viz., _that what has been may be again_; and that they did not see how
he could reach the height of power, which he has already arrived at,
after, I must confess, a very incredible manner. Let those _incredulous_
people look narrowly into the _nature_ and the _ends_ and the _designs_
of this great monarch; they will find that they are laid very deep, and
that his plans carry in them a prodigious deal of prudence and
foresight, and his ends are at the long run brought about by a kind of
magic in policy; and will they not after that own that we ought to fear
everything from him? As he desires that the designs with which he
labours may not prove abortive, so he does not assign them a certain day
of their birth, but leaves them to the natural productions of fit times
and occasions, like those curious artists in China, who temper the mould
this day of which a vessel may be made a hundred years hence.

There is another sort of short-sighted politicians among us, who have
more of cunning court intrigue and immediate statecraft in them than of
true policy and concern for their country's interest. These gentlemen
pin entirely their faith upon other people's sleeves; ask as to
everything that is proposed to them, how it is liked at Court? what the
opinion of their party is concerning it? and if the contrary party is
for or against it? Hereby they rule their judgment, and it is enough for
their cunning leaders to brand anything with _Whiggism_ or _Jacobitism_,
for to make these people, without any further inquiry into the matter,
blindly espouse it or oppose it. This, it seems, is at present the case
of the subject we are upon. Anything said or written in favour of
Sweden and the King thereof, is immediately said to come from a
_Jacobite_ pen, and thus reviled and rejected, without being read or
considered. Nay, I have heard gentlemen go so far as to maintain
publicly, and with all the vehemence in the world, that the King of
Sweden was a Roman Catholic, and that the Czar was a good Protestant.
This, indeed, is one of the greatest misfortunes our country labours
under, and till we begin to see with our own eyes, and inquire ourselves
into the truth of things, we shall be led away, God knows whither, at
last. The serving of Sweden according to our treaties and real interest
has nothing to do with our party causes. Instead of seeking for and
taking hold of any pretence to undo Sweden, we ought openly to assist
it. Could our Protestant succession have a better friend or a bolder
champion?

I shall conclude this by thus shortly recapitulating what I have said.
That since the Czar has not only replied to the King of Denmark
entreating the contrary, but also answered our Admiral Norris, that he
would persist in his resolution to delay the descent upon Schonen, and
is said by other newspapers to resolve not to make it then, if he can
have peace with Sweden; every Prince, and we more particularly, ought to
be jealous of his having some such design as I mention in view, and
consult how to prevent them, and to clip, in time, his too aspiring
wings, which cannot be effectually done, first, without the Maritime
Powers please to begin to keep him in some check and awe, and 'tis to be
hoped a certain potent nation, that has helped him forward, can, in some
measure, bring him back, and may then speak to this great enterpriser in
the language of a countryman in Spain, who coming to an image enshrined,
the first making whereof he could well remember, and not finding all the
respectful usage he expected,--"You need not," quoth he, "be so proud,
for we have known you from a plum-tree." The next only way is to
restore, by a peace, to the King of Sweden what he has lost; that checks
his (the Czar's) power immediately, and on that side nothing else can. I
wish it may not at last be found true, that those who have been
fighting against that King have, in the main, been fighting against
themselves. If the Swede ever has his dominions again, and lowers the
high spirit of the Czar, still he may say by his neighbours, as an old
Greek hero did, whom his countrymen constantly sent into exile whenever
he had done them a service, but were forced to call him back to their
aid, whenever they wanted success. "These people," quoth he, "are always
using me like the palm-tree. They will be breaking my branches
continually, and yet, if there comes a storm, they run to me, and can't
find a better place for shelter." But if he has them not, I shall only
exclaim a phrase out of Terence's "Andria":


     "Hoccine credibile est aut memorabile
     Tanta vecordia innata cuiquam ut siet,
     Ut malis gaudeant?"


4. POSTSCRIPT.--I flatter myself that this little history is of that
curious nature, and on matters hitherto so unobserved, that I consider
it, with pride, as a valuable New Year's gift to the present world; and
that posterity will accept it, as the like, for many years after, and
read it over on that anniversary, and call it their _Warning Piece_. I
must have my _Exegi-Monumentum_ as well as others.

FOOTNOTE:

[20] Or, to follow this affectation of silliness into more recent times,
is there anything in diplomatic history that could match Lord
Palmerston's proposal made to Marshal Soult (in 1839), to storm the
Dardanelles, in order to afford the Sultan the support of the
Anglo-French fleet against Russia?




CHAPTER III


To understand a limited historical epoch, we must step beyond its
limits, and compare it with other historical epochs. To judge
Governments and their acts, we must measure them by their own times and
the conscience of their contemporaries. Nobody will condemn a British
statesman of the 17th century for acting on a belief in witchcraft, if
he find Bacon himself ranging demonology in the catalogue of science. On
the other hand, if the Stanhopes, the Walpoles, the Townshends, etc.,
were suspected, opposed, and denounced in their own country by their own
contemporaries as tools or accomplices of Russia, it will no longer do
to shelter their policy behind the convenient screen of prejudice and
ignorance common to their time. At the head of the historical evidence
we have to sift, we place, therefore, long-forgotten English pamphlets
printed at the very time of Peter I. These preliminary _pièces des
procès_ we shall, however, limit to three pamphlets, which, from three
different points of view, illustrate the conduct of England towards
Sweden. The first, the _Northern Crisis_ (given in Chapter II.),
revealing the general system of Russia, and the dangers accruing to
England from the Russification of Sweden; the second, called _The
Defensive Treaty_, judging the acts of England by the Treaty of 1700;
and the third, entitled _Truth is but Truth, however it is Timed_,
proving that the new-fangled schemes which magnified Russia into the
paramount Power of the Baltic were in flagrant opposition to the
traditionary policy England had pursued during the course of a whole
century.

The pamphlet called _The Defensive Treaty_ bears no date of publication.
Yet in one passage it states that, for reinforcing the Danish fleet,
eight English men-of-war were left at Copenhagen "_the year before the
last_," and in another passage alludes to the assembling of the
confederate fleet for the Schonen expedition as having occurred "_last
summer_." As the former event took place in 1715, and the latter towards
the end of the summer of 1716, it is evident that the pamphlet was
written and published in the earlier part of the year 1717. The
Defensive Treaty between England and Sweden, the single articles of
which the pamphlet comments upon in the form of queries, was concluded
in 1700 between William III. and Charles XII., and was not to expire
before 1719. Yet, during almost the whole of this period, we find
England continually assisting Russia and waging war against Sweden,
either by secret intrigue or open force, although the treaty was never
rescinded nor war ever declared. This fact is, perhaps, even less
strange than the _conspiration de silence_ under which modern historians
have succeeded in burying it, and among them historians by no means
sparing of censure against the British Government of that time, for
having, without any previous declaration of war, destroyed the Spanish
fleet in the Sicilian waters. But then, at least, England was not bound
to Spain by a defensive treaty. How, then, are we to explain this
contrary treatment of similar cases? The piracy committed against Spain
was one of the weapons which the Whig Ministers, seceding from the
Cabinet in 1717, caught hold of to harass their remaining colleagues.
When the latter stepped forward in 1718, and urged Parliament to declare
war against Spain, Sir Robert Walpole rose from his seat in the Commons,
and in a most virulent speech denounced the late ministerial acts "as
contrary to the laws of nations, and a breach of solemn treaties."
"Giving sanction to them in the manner proposed," he said, "could have
no other view than to screen ministers, who were conscious of having
done something amiss, and who, having begun a war against Spain, would
now make it the Parliament's war." The treachery against Sweden and the
connivance at the plans of Russia, never happening to afford the
ostensible pretext for a family quarrel amongst the Whig rulers (they
being rather unanimous on these points), never obtained the honours of
historical criticism so lavishly spent upon the Spanish incident.

How apt modern historians generally are to receive their cue from the
official tricksters themselves, is best shown by their reflections on
the commercial interests of England with respect to Russia and Sweden.
Nothing has been more exaggerated than the dimensions of the trade
opened to Great Britain by the huge market of the Russia of Peter the
Great, and his immediate successors. Statements bearing not the
slightest touch of criticism have been allowed to creep from one
book-shelf to another, till they became at last historical household
furniture, to be inherited by every successive historian, without even
the _beneficium inventarii_. Some incontrovertible statistical figures
will suffice to blot out these hoary common-places.


         BRITISH COMMERCE FROM 1697-1700.

                                          £
     Export to Russia                   58,884
     Import from Russia                112,252
                                     ---------
                  Total                171,136

     Export to Sweden                   57,555
     Import from Sweden                212,094
                                     ---------
                  Total                269,649


During the same period the total


                                         £
     Export of England amounted to   3,525,906
     Import                          3,482,586
                                     ---------
                  Total              7,008,492


In 1716, after all the Swedish provinces in the Baltic, and on the Gulfs
of Finland and Bothnia, had fallen into the hands of Peter I., the


                                 £
     Export to Russia was     113,154
     Import from Russia       197,270
                             --------
                  Total       310,424

     Export to Sweden          24,101
     Import from Sweden       136,959
                             --------
                  Total       161,060


At the same time, the total of English exports and imports together
reached about £10,000,000. It will be seen from these figures, when
compared with those of 1697-1700, that the increase in the Russian trade
is balanced by the decrease in the Swedish trade, and that what was
added to the one was subtracted from the other.

In 1730, the


                                     £
     Export to Russia was          46,275
     Import from Russia           258,802
                                 --------
                  Total           305,077


Fifteen years, then, after the consolidation in the meanwhile of the
Muscovite settlement on the Baltic, the British trade with Russia had
fallen off by £5,347. The general trade of England reaching in 1730 the
sum of £16,329,001, the Russian trade amounted not yet to 1/53rd of its
total value. Again, thirty years later, in 1760, the account between
Great Britain and Russia stands thus:


                                         £
     Import from Russia (in 1760)     536,504
     Export to Russia                  39,761
                                     --------
                  Total              £576,265


while the general trade of England amounted to £26,361,760. Comparing
these figures with those of 1706, we find that the total of the Russian
commerce, after nearly half a century, has increased by the trifling sum
of only £265,841. That England suffered positive loss by her new
commercial relations with Russia under Peter I. and Catherine I.
becomes evident on comparing, on the one side, the export and import
figures, and on the other, the sums expended on the frequent naval
expeditions to the Baltic which England undertook during the lifetime of
Charles XII., in order to break down his resistance to Russia, and,
after his death, on the professed necessity of checking the maritime
encroachments of Russia.

Another glance at the statistical data given for the years 1697, 1700,
1716, 1730, and 1760, will show that the British _export_ trade to
Russia was continually falling off, save in 1716, when Russia engrossed
the whole Swedish trade on the eastern coast of the Baltic and the Gulf
of Bothnia, and had not yet found the opportunity of subjecting it to
her own regulations. From £58,884, at which the British exports to
Russia stood during 1697-1700, when Russia was still precluded from the
Baltic, they had sunk to £46,275 in 1730, and to £39,761 in 1760,
showing a decrease of £19,123, or about 1/3rd of their original amount
in 1700. If, then, since, the absorption of the Swedish provinces by
Russia, the British market proved expanding for Russia raw produce, the
Russian market, on its side, proved straitening for British
manufacturers, a feature of that trade which could hardly recommend it
at a time when the Balance of Trade doctrine ruled supreme. To trace the
circumstances which produced the increase of the Anglo-Russian trade
under Catherine II. would lead us too far from the period we are
considering.

On the whole, then, we arrive at the following conclusions: During the
first sixty years of the eighteenth century the total Anglo-Russian
trade formed but a very diminutive fraction of the general trade of
England, say less than 1/45th. Its sudden increase during the earliest
years of Peter's sway over the Baltic did not at all affect the general
balance of British trade, as it was a simple transfer from its Swedish
account to its Russian account. In the later times of Peter I., as well
as under his immediate successors, Catherine I. and Anne, the
Anglo-Russian trade was positively declining; during the whole epoch,
dating from the final settlement of Russia in the Baltic provinces, the
export of British manufactures to Russia was continually falling off, so
that at its end it stood one-third lower than at its beginning, when
that trade was still confined to the port of Archangel. Neither the
contemporaries of Peter I., nor the next British generation reaped any
benefit from the advancement of Russia to the Baltic. In general the
Baltic trade of Great Britain was at that time trifling in regard of the
capital involved, but important in regard of its character. It afforded
England the raw produce for its maritime stores. That from the latter
point of view the Baltic was in safer keeping in the hands of Sweden
than in those of Russia, was not only proved by the pamphlets we are
reprinting, but fully understood by the British Ministers themselves.
Stanhope writing, for instance, to Townshend on October 16th, 1716:


     "It is certain that if the Czar be let alone three years, he will
     be absolute master in those seas."[21]


If, then, neither the navigation nor the general commerce of England was
interested in the treacherous support given to Russia against Sweden,
there existed, indeed, one small fraction of British merchants whose
interests were identical with the Russian ones--the Russian Trade
Company. It was this gentry that raised a cry against Sweden. See, for
instance:


     "Several grievances of the English merchants in their trade into
     the dominions of the King of Sweden, whereby it does appear how
     dangerous it may be for the English nation to depend on Sweden only
     for the supply of the naval stores, when they might be amply
     furnished with the like stores from the dominions of the Emperor of
     Russia."

     "The case of the merchants trading to Russia" (a petition to
     Parliament), etc.


It was they who in the years 1714, 1715, and 1716, regularly assembled
twice a week before the opening of Parliament, to draw up in public
meetings the complaints of the British merchantmen against Sweden. On
this small fraction the Ministers relied; they were even busy in getting
up its demonstrations, as may be seen from the letters addressed by
Count Gyllenborg to Baron Görtz, dated 4th of November and 4th of
December, 1716, wanting, as they did, but the shadow of a pretext to
drive their "mercenary Parliament," as Gyllenborg calls it, where they
liked. The influence of these British merchants trading to Russia was
again exhibited in the year 1765, and our own times have witnessed the
working for his interest, of a Russian merchant at the head of the Board
of Trade, and of a Chancellor of the Exchequer in the interest of a
cousin engaged in the Archangel trade.

The oligarchy which, after the "glorious revolution," usurped wealth and
power at the cost of the mass of the British people, was, of course,
forced to look out for allies, not only abroad, but also at home. The
latter they found in what the French would call _la haute bourgeoisie_,
as represented by the Bank of England, the money-lenders, State
creditors, East India and other trading corporations, the great
manufacturers, etc. How tenderly they managed the material interests of
that class may be learned from the whole of their domestic
legislation--Bank Acts, Protectionist enactments, Poor Regulations, etc.
As to their _foreign policy_, they wanted to give it the appearance at
least of being altogether regulated by the mercantile interest, an
appearance the more easily to be produced, as the exclusive interest of
one or the other small fraction of that class would, of course, be
always identified with this or that Ministerial measure. The interested
fraction then raised the commerce and navigation cry, which the nation
stupidly re-echoed.

At that time, then, there devolved on the Cabinet, at least, the _onus_
of inventing _mercantile pretexts_, however futile, for their measures
of foreign policy. In our own epoch, British Ministers have thrown this
burden on foreign nations, leaving to the French, the Germans, etc.,
the irksome task of discovering the _secret_ and _hidden_ mercantile
springs of their actions. Lord Palmerston, for instance, takes a step
apparently the most damaging to the material interests of Great Britain.
Up starts a State philosopher, on the other side of the Atlantic, or of
the Channel, or in the heart of Germany, who puts his head to the rack
to dig out the mysteries of the mercantile Machiavelism of "perfide
Albion," of which Palmerston is supposed the unscrupulous and
unflinching executor. We will, _en passant_, show, by a few modern
instances, what desperate shifts those foreigners have been driven to,
who feel themselves obliged to interpret Palmerston's acts by what they
imagine to be the English commercial policy. In his valuable _Histoire
Politique et Sociale des Principautés Danubiennes_, M. Elias Regnault,
startled by the Russian conduct, before and during the years 1848-49 of
Mr. Colquhoun, the British Consul at Bucharest, suspects that England
has some secret material interest in keeping down the trade of the
Principalities. The late Dr. Cunibert, private physician of old Milosh,
in his most interesting account of the Russian intrigues in Servia,
gives a curious relation of the manner in which Lord Palmerston, through
the instrumentality of Colonel Hodges, betrayed Milosh to Russia by
feigning to support him against her. Fully believing in the personal
integrity of Hodges, and the patriotic zeal of Palmerston, Dr. Cunibert
is found to go a step further than M. Elias Regnault. He suspects
England of being interested in putting down Turkish commerce generally.
General Mieroslawski, in his last work on Poland, is not very far from
intimating that mercantile Machiavelism instigated England to sacrifice
her own _prestige_ in Asia Minor, by the surrender of Kars. As a last
instance may serve the present lucubrations of the Paris papers, hunting
after the secret springs of commercial jealousy, which induce Palmerston
to oppose the cutting of the Isthmus of Suez canal.

To return to our subject. The mercantile pretext hit upon by the
Townshends, Stanhopes, etc., for the hostile demonstrations against
Sweden, was the following. Towards the end of 1713, Peter I. had
ordered all the hemp and other produce of his dominions, destined for
export, to be carried to St. Petersburg instead of Archangel. Then the
Swedish Regency, during the absence of Charles XII., and Charles XII.
himself, after his return from Bender, declared all the Baltic ports,
occupied by the Russians, to be blockaded. Consequently, English ships,
breaking through the blockade, were confiscated. The English Ministry
then asserted that British merchantmen had the right of trading to those
ports according to Article XVII. of the Defensive Treaty of 1700, by
which English commerce, with the exception of contraband of war, was
allowed to go on with ports of the enemy. The absurdity and falsehood of
this pretext being fully exposed in the pamphlet we are about to
reprint, we will only remark that the case had been more than once
decided against commercial nations, not bound, like England, by treaty
to defend the integrity of the Swedish Empire. In the year 1561, when
the Russians took Narva, and laboured hard to establish their commerce
there, the Hanse towns, chiefly Lübeck, tried to possess themselves of
this traffic. Eric XIV., then King of Sweden, resisted their
pretensions. The city of Lübeck represented this resistance as
altogether new, as they had carried on their commerce with the Russians
time out of mind, and pleaded the common right of nations to navigate in
the Baltic, provided their vessels carried no contraband of war. The
King replied that he did not dispute the Hanse towns the liberty of
trading with Russia, but only with Narva, which was no Russian port. In
the year 1579 again, the Russians having broken the suspension of arms
with Sweden, the Danes likewise claimed the navigation to Narva, by
virtue of their treaty, but King John was as firm in maintaining the
contrary, as was his brother Eric.

In her open demonstrations of hostility against the King of Sweden, as
well as in the false pretence on which they were founded, England seemed
only to follow in the track of Holland, which declaring the confiscation
of its ships to be piracy, had issued two proclamations against Sweden
in 1714.

In one respect, the case of the States-General was the same as that of
England. King William had concluded the Defensive Treaty as well for
Holland as for England. Besides, Article XVI., in the Treaty of
Commerce, concluded between Holland and Sweden in 1703, expressly
stipulated that no navigation ought to be allowed to the ports blocked
up by either of the confederates. The then common Dutch cant that "there
was no hindering traders from carrying their merchandise where they
will," was the more impudent as, during the war, ending with the Peace
of Ryswick, the Dutch Republic had declared all France to be blocked up,
forbidden the neutral Powers all trade with that kingdom, and caused all
their ships that went there or came thence to be brought up without any
regard to the nature of their cargoes.

In another respect, the situation of Holland was different from that of
England. Fallen from its commercial and maritime grandeur, Holland had
then already entered upon its epoch of decline. Like Genoa and Venice,
when new roads of commerce had dispossessed them of their old mercantile
supremacy, it was forced to lend out to other nations its capital, grown
too large for the vessels of its own commerce. Its fatherland had begun
to lie there where the best interest for its capital was paid. Russia,
therefore, proved an immense market, less for the commerce than for the
outlay of capital and men. To this moment Holland has remained the
banker of Russia. At the time of Peter they supplied Russia with ships,
officers, arms, and money, so that his fleet, as a contemporary writer
remarks, ought to have been called a Dutch rather than a Muscovite one.
They gloried in having sent the first European merchant ship to St.
Petersburg, and returned the commercial privileges they had obtained
from Peter, or hoped to obtain from him, by that fawning meanness which
characterizes their intercourse with Japan. Here, then, was quite
another solid foundation than in England for the Russianism of
statesmen, whom Peter I. had entrapped during his stay at Amsterdam, and
the Hague in 1697, whom he afterwards directed by his ambassadors, and
with whom he renewed his personal influence during his renewed stay at
Amsterdam in 1716-17. Yet, if the paramount influence England exercised
over Holland during the first _decennia_ of the 18th century be
considered, there can remain no doubt that the proclamations against
Sweden by the States-General would never have been issued, if not with
the previous consent and at the instigation of England. The intimate
connection between the English and Dutch Governments served more than
once the former to put up precedents in the name of Holland, which they
were resolved to act upon in the name of England. On the other hand, it
is no less certain that the Dutch statesmen were employed by the Czar to
influence the British ones. Thus Horace Walpole, the brother of the
"Father of Corruption," the brother-in-law of the Minister, Townshend,
and the British Ambassador at the Hague during 1715-16, was evidently
inveigled into the Russian interest by his Dutch friends. Thus, as we
shall see by-and-by, Theyls, the Secretary to the Dutch Embassy at
Constantinople, at the most critical period of the deadly struggle
between Charles XII. and Peter I., managed affairs at the same time for
the Embassies of England and Holland at the Sublime Porte. This Theylls,
in a print of his, openly claims it as a merit with his nation to have
been the devoted and rewarded agent of Russian intrigue.

FOOTNOTE:

[21] In the year 1657, when the Courts of Denmark and Brandenburg
intended engaging the Muscovites to fall upon Sweden, they instructed
their Minister so to manage the affair that the Czar might by no means
get any footing in the Baltic, because "they did not know what to do
with so troublesome a neighbour." (See Puffendorf's _History of
Brandenburg_.)




CHAPTER IV


     "_The Defensive Treaty concluded in the year 1700, between his late
     Majesty, King William, of ever-glorious memory, and his present
     Swedish Majesty, King Charles XII. Published at the earnest desire
     of several members of both Houses of Parliament._


     'Nec rumpite foedera pacis,
     Nec regnis præferte fidem.'
                                 --SILIUS, _Lip._ II.


"_Article I._ Establishes between the Kings of Sweden and England 'a
sincere and constant friendship for ever, a league and good
correspondence, so that they shall never mutually or separately molest
one another's kingdoms, provinces, colonies, or subjects, wheresoever
situated, _nor shall they suffer or agree that this should be done by
others, etc._'

"_Article II._ 'Moreover, each of the Allies, his heirs and successors,
shall be obliged to take care of, and promote, as much as in him lies,
the profit and honour of the other, to detect and give notice to his
other ally (as soon as it shall come to his own knowledge) of all
imminent dangers, conspiracies, and hostile designs formed against him,
to withstand them as much as possible, and to prevent them both by
advice and assistance; and therefore _it shall not be lawful for either
of the Allies, either by themselves or any other whatsoever, to act,
treat, or endeavour anything to the prejudice or loss of the other_, his
lands or dominions whatsoever or wheresoever, whether by land or sea;
that one shall in no wise favour the other's foes, either rebels or
enemies, to the prejudice of his Ally,' etc.

"_Query I._ How the words marked in italics agree with our present
conduct, when our fleet acts in conjunction with the enemies of Sweden,
_the Czar commands our fleet, our Admiral enters into Councils of War,
and is not only privy to all their designs, but together with our own
Minister at Copenhagen_ (as the King of Denmark has himself owned it in
a public declaration), _pushed on the Northern Confederates to an
enterprise entirely destructive to our Ally Sweden, I mean the descent
designed last summer upon Schonen_?

"_Query II._ In what manner we also must explain that passage in the
first article by which it is stipulated that one Ally shall not either
by themselves or any other whatsoever, act, treat, or endeavour anything
to the loss of the other's lands and dominions; to justify in particular
our leaving in the year 1715, even when the season was so far advanced
as no longer to admit of our usual pretence of conveying and protecting
our trade, which was then got already safe home, eight men-of-war in the
Baltic, with orders to join in one line of battle with the Danes,
whereby we made them so much superior in number to the Swedish fleet,
that it could not come to the relief of Straelsund, and whereby _we
chiefly occasioned Sweden's entirely losing its German Provinces_, and
even the _extreme danger his Swedish Majesty ran in his own person_, in
crossing the sea, before the surrender of the town.

"_Article III._ By a special defensive treaty, the Kings of Sweden and
England mutually oblige themselves, 'in a strict alliance, to defend one
another mutually, as well as their kingdoms, territories, provinces,
states, subjects, possessions, as their rights and liberties of
navigation and commerce, as well in the Northern, Deucalidonian,
Western, and Britannic Sea, commonly called the Channel, the Baltic, the
Sound; as also of the privileges and prerogatives of each of the Allies
belonging to them, by virtue of treaties and agreements, as well as by
received customs, the laws of nations, hereditary right, against any
aggressors or invaders and molesters in Europe by sea or land, etc.'

"_Query._ It being by the law of nations an indisputable right and
prerogative of any king or people, in case of a great necessity or
threatening ruin, to use all such means they themselves shall judge most
necessary for their preservation; it having moreover been a constant
prerogative and practice of the Swedes, for these several hundred years,
in case of a war with their most dreadful enemies the Muscovites, to
hinder all trade with them in the Baltic; and since it is also
stipulated in this article that amongst other things, _one Ally ought to
defend the prerogatives belonging to the other, even by received
customs, and the law of nations_: how come we now, the King of Sweden
stands more than ever in need of using that prerogative, not only to
dispute it, but also to take thereof a pretence for an open hostility
against him?

"_Articles IV., V., VI., and VII._ fix the strength of the auxiliary
forces England and Sweden are to send each other in case the territory
of either of these powers should be invaded, or its navigation 'molested
or hindered' in one of the seas enumerated in Article III. The invasion
of the _German_ provinces of Sweden is expressly included as a _casus
foederis_.

"_Article VIII._ stipulates that that Ally who is not attacked shall
first act the part of a pacific mediator; but, the mediation having
proved a failure, 'the aforesaid forces shall be sent without delay; nor
shall the confederates desist before the injured party shall be
satisfied in all things.'

"_Article IX._ That Ally that requires the stipulated 'help, has to
choose whether he will have the above-named army either all or any,
either in soldiers, ships, ammunition, or money.'

"_Article X._ Ships and armies serve under 'the command of him that
required them.'

"_Article XI._ 'But if it should happen that the above-mentioned forces
should not be proportionable to the danger, as supposing that perhaps
the aggressor should be assisted by the forces of some other
confederates of his, then one of the Allies, after previous request,
shall be obliged to help the other that is injured, with greater forces,
such as he shall be able to raise with safety and convenience, both by
sea and land....'

"_Article XII._ 'It shall be lawful for either of the Allies and their
subjects to bring their men-of-war into one another's harbours, and to
winter there.' Peculiar negotiations about this point shall take place
at Stockholm, but 'in the meanwhile, the articles of treaty concluded at
London, 1661, relating to the navigation and commerce shall remain, in
their full force, as much as if they were inserted here word for word.'

"_Article XIII._ ' ... The subjects of either of the Allies ... shall no
way, either by sea or land, serve them (the enemies of either of the
Allies), either as mariners or soldiers, and therefore it shall be
forbid them upon severe penalty.'

"_Article XIV._ 'If it happens that either of the confederate kings ...
should be engaged in a war against a common enemy, or be molested by any
other neighbouring king ... in his own kingdoms or provinces ... to the
hindering of which, he that requires help may by the force of this
treaty himself be obliged to send help: then that Ally so molested shall
not be obliged to send the promised help....'

"_Query I._ Whether in our conscience we don't think the King of Sweden
most unjustly attacked by all his enemies; whether consequently we are
not convinced that we owe him the assistance stipulated in these
Articles; whether he has not demanded the same from us, and why it has
hitherto been refused him?

"_Query II._ These articles, setting forth in the most expressing terms,
in what manner Great Britain and Sweden ought to assist one another, can
either of these two Allies take upon him to prescribe to the other who
requires his assistance a way of lending him it not expressed in the
treaty; and if that other Ally does not think it for his interest to
accept of the same, but still insists upon the performance of the
treaty, can he from thence take a pretence, not only to withhold the
stipulated assistance, but also to use his Ally in a hostile way, and to
join with his enemies against him? If this is not justifiable, as even
common sense tells us it is not, how can the reason stand good, which we
allege amongst others, for using the King of Sweden as we do, _id est_,
that demanding a literal performance of his alliance with us, _he would
not accept the treaty of neutrality for his German provinces_, which we
proposed to him some years ago, a treaty which, not to mention its
partiality in favour of the enemies of Sweden, and that it was
calculated only for our own interest, and for to prevent all disturbance
in the empire, whilst we were engaged in a war against France, the King
of Sweden had so much less reason to rely upon, as he was to conclude it
with those very enemies, that had every one of them broken several
treaties in beginning the present war against him, and as it was to be
guaranteed by those powers, who were also every one of them guarantees
of the broken treaties, without having performed their guarantee?

"_Query III._ How can we make the words in the 7th Article, _that in
assisting our injured Ally we shall not desist before he shall be
satisfied in all things_, agree with our endeavouring, to the contrary,
to help the enemies of that Prince, though all unjust aggressors, not
only to take one province after the other from him, but also to remain
undisturbed possessors thereof, blaming all along the King of Sweden for
not tamely submitting thereunto?

"_Query IV._ The treaty concluded in the year 1661, between Great
Britain and Sweden, being in the 11th Article confirmed, and the said
treaty forbidding expressly one of the confederates _either himself or
his subjects to lend or to sell to the other's enemies, men-of-war or
ships of defence_; the 13th Article of this present treaty forbidding
also expressly the subjects of either of the Allies _to help anyways the
enemies of the other, to the inconvenience and loss of such an Ally_;
should we not have accused the Swedes of the most notorious breach of
this treaty, had they, during our late war with the French, lent them
their own fleet, the better to execute any design of theirs against us,
or had they, notwithstanding our representations to the contrary,
suffered their subjects to furnish the French with ships of 50, 60, and
70 guns! Now, if we turn the tables, and remember upon how many
occasions our fleet has of late been entirely subservient to the designs
of the enemies of Sweden, even in most critical times, and that _the
Czar of Muscovy has actually above a dozen English-built ships_ in his
fleet, will it not be very difficult for us to excuse in ourselves what
we should most certainly have blamed, if done by others?

"_Article XVII._ The obligation shall not be so far extended as that all
friendship and mutual commerce with the enemies of that Ally (that
requires the help) shall be taken away; for supposing that one of the
confederates should send his auxiliaries, and should not be engaged in
the war himself, it shall then be lawful for the subjects to trade and
commerce with that enemy of that Ally that is engaged in the war, also
directly and safely to merchandise with such enemies, for all goods not
expressly forbid and called contraband, as in a special treaty of
commerce hereafter shall be appointed.

"_Query I._ This Article being the only one out of twenty-two whose
performance we have now occasion to insist upon from the Swedes, the
question will be whether we ourselves, in regard to Sweden, have
performed all the other articles as it was our part to do, and whether
in demanding of the King of Sweden the executing of this Article, we
have promised that we would also do our duty as to all the rest; if not,
may not the Swedes say that we complain unjustly of the breach of one
single Article, when we ourselves may perhaps be found guilty of having
in the most material points either not executed or even acted against
the whole treaty?

"_Query II._ Whether the liberty of commerce one Ally is, by virtue of
this Article, to enjoy with the other's enemies, ought to have no
limitation at all, neither as to time nor place; in short, whether it
ought even to be extended so far as to destroy the very end of this
Treaty, which is the promoting the safety and security of one another's
kingdoms?

"_Query III._ Whether in case the French had in the late wars made
themselves masters of Ireland or Scotland, and either in new-made
seaports, or the old ones, endeavoured by trade still more firmly to
establish themselves in their new conquest, we, in such a case, should
have thought the Swedes our true allies and friends, had they insisted
upon this Article to trade with the French in the said seaports taken
from us, and to furnish them there with several necessaries of war, nay,
even with armed ships, whereby the French might the easier have annoyed
us here in England?

"_Query IV._ Whether, if we had gone about to hinder a trade so
prejudicial to us, and in order thereunto brought up all Swedish ships
going to the said seaports, we should not highly have exclaimed against
the Swedes, had they taken from thence a pretence to join their fleet
with the French, to occasion the losing of any of our dominions, and
even to encourage the invasion upon us, have their fleet at hand to
promote the same?

"_Query V._ Whether upon an impartial examination this would not have
been a case exactly parallel to that we insist upon, as to a free Trade
to the seaports the Czar has taken from Sweden, and to our present
behaviour, upon the King of Sweden's hindering the same?

"_Query VI._ Whether we have not ever since Oliver Cromwell's time till
1710, in all our wars with France and Holland, without any urgent
necessity at all, brought up and confiscated Swedish ships, though not
going to any prohibited ports, and that to a far greater number and
value, than all those the Swedes have now taken from us, and whether the
Swedes have ever taken a pretence from thence to join with our enemies,
and to send whole squadrons of ships to their assistance?

"_Query VII._ Whether, if we inquire narrowly into the state of
commerce, as it has been carried on for these many years, we shall not
find that the trade of the above-mentioned places was not so very
necessary to us, at least not so far as to be put into the balance with
the preservation of a Protestant confederate nation, much less to give
us a just reason _to make war against that nation, which, though not
declared, has done it more harm than the united efforts of all its
enemies_?

"_Query VIII._ Whether, if it happened two years ago, that this trade
became something more necessary to us than formerly, it is not easily
proved, that it was occasioned only by the Czar's forcing us out of our
old channel of trade to Archangel, and bringing us to Petersburg, and
our complying therewith. So that all the inconveniences we laboured
under upon that account ought to have been laid to the Czar's door, and
not to the King of Sweden's?

"_Query IX._ Whether the Czar did not in the very beginning of 1715
again permit us to trade our old way to Archangel, and whether our
Ministers had not notice thereof a great while before our fleet was sent
that year to protect our _trade to Petersburg_, which by this alteration
in the Czar's resolution was become as unnecessary for us as before?

"_Query X._ Whether the King of Sweden had not declared, that if we
would forbear trading to _Petersburg_, etc., which he looked upon as
ruinous to his kingdom, he would in no manner disturb our trade, neither
in the Baltic nor anywhere else; but that in case we would not give him
this slight proof of our friendship, he should be excused if the
innocent came to suffer with the guilty?

"_Query XI._ Whether, by our insisting upon the trade to the ports
prohibited by the King of Sweden, which besides it being unnecessary to
us, hardly makes one part in ten of that we carry on in the Baltic, we
have not drawn upon us the hazards that our trade has run all this
while, been ourselves the occasion of our great expenses in fitting out
fleets for its protection, and by our joining with the enemies of
Sweden, fully justified his Swedish Majesty's resentment; had it ever
gone so far as to seize and confiscate without distinction all our ships
and effects, wheresoever he found them, either within or without his
kingdoms?

"_Query XII._ If we were so tender of our trade to the northern ports in
general, ought we not in policy rather to have considered the hazard
that trade runs by the approaching ruin of Sweden, and _by the Czar's
becoming the whole and sole master of the Baltic, and all the naval
stores we want from thence_? Have we not also suffered greater hardships
and losses in the said trade from the Czar, than that amounting only to
sixty odd thousand pounds (whereof, by the way, two parts in three may
perhaps be disputable), which provoked us first to send twenty
men-of-war in the Baltic with order to attack the Swedes wherever they
met them? And yet, did not this very Czar, this very aspiring and
dangerous prince, _last summer command the whole confederate fleet_, as
it was called, _of which our men-of-war made the most considerable part?
The first instance that ever was of a Foreign Potentate having the
command given him of the English fleet, the bulwark of our nation_; and
did not our said men-of-war afterwards convey his (the Czar's) transport
ships and troops on board of them, in their return from Zealand,
_protecting them from the Swedish fleet_, which else would have made a
considerable havoc amongst them?

"_Query XIII._ Suppose now, we had, on the contrary, taken hold of the
great and many complaints our merchants have made of the ill-usage they
meet from the Czar, to have sent our fleet to show our resentment
against that prince, to prevent his great and pernicious designs even to
us, _to assist Sweden pursuant to this Treaty_, and effectually to
restore the peace in the North, would not that have been more for our
interest, more necessary, more honourable and just, and more according
to our Treaty; and would not the several 100,000 pounds these our
Northern expeditions have cost the nation, have been thus better
employed?

"_Query XIV._ If the preserving and securing our trade against the
Swedes has been the only and real object of all our measures, as to the
Northern affairs, how came we the year before the last to leave eight
men-of-war in the Baltic and at Copenhagen, when we had no more trade
there to protect, and how came Admiral Norris last summer, although he
and the Dutch together made up the number of twenty-six men-of-war, and
consequently were too strong for the Swedes, to attempt anything against
our trade under their convoy; yet to lay above two whole months of the
best season in the Sound, without convoying our and the Dutch
merchantmen to the several ports they were bound for, whereby they were
kept in the Baltic so late that their return could not but be very
hazardous, as it even proved, both to them and our men-of-war
themselves? Will not the world be apt to think that the hopes of forcing
the King of Sweden to an inglorious and disadvantageous peace, by which
the Duchies of Bremen and Verden ought to be added to the Hanover
dominions, or that some other such view, foreign, if not contrary, to
the true and old interest of Great Britain, had then a greater influence
upon all these our proceedings than _the pretended care of our trade_?

"_Article XVIII._ For as much as it seems convenient for the
preservation of the liberty of navigation and commerce in the Baltic
Sea, that a firm and exact friendship should be kept between the Kings
of Sweden and Denmark; and whereas the former Kings of Sweden and
Denmark did oblige themselves mutually, not only by the public Articles
of Peace made in the camp of Copenhagen, on the 27th of May, 1660, and
by the ratifications of the agreement interchanged on both sides,
sacredly and inviolably to observe all and every one of the clauses
comprehended in the said agreement, but also declared together to ...
Charles II., King of Great Britain ... a little before the treaty
concluded between England and Sweden in the year 1665, that they would
stand sincerely ... to all ... of the Articles of the said peace ...
whereupon Charles II., with the approbation and consent of both the
forementioned Kings of Sweden and Denmark, took upon himself a little
after the Treaty concluded between England and Sweden, 1st March, 1665,
to wit 9th October, 1665, guarantee of the same agreements.... Whereas
an instrument of peace between ... the Kings of Sweden and Denmark
happened to be soon after these concluded at Lunden in Schonen, in 1679,
which contains an express transaction, and repetition and confirmation
of the Treaties concluded at Roskild, Copenhagen, and Westphalia;
therefore ... the King of Great Britain binds himself by the force of
this Treaty ... that if either of the Kings of Sweden and Denmark shall
consent to the violation, either of all the agreements, or of one or
more articles comprehended in them, and consequently if either of the
Kings shall to the prejudice of the person, provinces, territories,
islands, goods, dominions and rights of the other, which by the force of
the agreements so often repeated, and made in the camp of Copenhagen, on
the 27th of May, 1660, as also of those made in the ... peace at Lunden
in Schonen in 1679, were attributed to every one that was interested and
comprehended in the words of the peace, should either by himself or by
others, presume, or secretly design or attempt, or by open molestations,
or by any injury, or by any violence of arms, attempt anything; that
then the ... King of Great Britain ... shall first of all, by his
interposition, perform all the offices of a friend and princely ally,
which may serve towards the keeping inviolable all the frequently
mentioned agreements, and of every article comprehended in them, and
consequently towards the preservation of peace between both kings; that
afterwards if the King, who is the beginner of such prejudice, or any
molestation or injury, contrary to all agreements, and contrary to any
articles comprehended in them, shall refuse after being admonished ...
then the King of Great Britain ... shall ... assist him that is injured
as by the present agreements between the Kings of Great Britain and
Sweden in such cases is determined and agreed.

"_Query._ Does not this article expressly tell us how to remedy the
disturbances our trade in the Baltic might suffer, in case of a
misunderstanding betwixt the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, by obliging
both these Princes to keep all the Treaties of Peace that have been
concluded between them from 1660-1670, and in case either of them should
in an hostile manner act against the said Treaties, by assisting the
other against the aggressor? How comes it then that we don't make use of
so just a remedy against an evil we are so great sufferers by? Can
anybody, though ever so partial, deny but the King of Denmark, though
seemingly a sincere friend to the King of Sweden, from the peace of
Travendahl till he went out of Saxony against the Muscovites, fell very
unjustly upon him immediately after, taking ungenerously advantage of
the fatal battle of Pultava? Is not then the King of Denmark the
violator of all the above-mentioned Treaties, and consequently the true
author of the disturbances our trade meets with in the Baltic? Why in
God's name don't we, according to this article, assist Sweden against
him, and why do we, on the contrary, declare openly against the injured
King of Sweden, send hectoring and threatening memorials to him, upon
the least advantage he has over his enemies, as we did last summer upon
his entering Norway, and even order our fleets to act openly against him
in conjunction with the Danes?

"_Article XIX._ There shall be 'stricter confederacy and union between
the above-mentioned Kings of Great Britain and Sweden, for the future,
_for the defence and preservation of the Protestant, Evangelic, and
reformed religion_.'

"_Query I._ How do we, according to this article, join with Sweden to
_assert, protect, and preserve the Protestant religion_? Don't we suffer
that nation, which has always been a bulwark to the said religion, most
unmercifully to be torn to pieces?... _Don't we ourselves give a helping
hand towards its destruction?_ And why all this? Because our merchants
have lost their ships to the value of sixty odd thousand pounds. _For
this loss, and nothing else, was the pretended reason why, in the year
1715, we sent our fleet in the Baltic, at the expense of £200,000_; and
as to what our merchants have suffered since, suppose we attribute it to
our threatening memorials as well as open hostilities against the King
of Sweden, must we not even then own that that Prince's resentment has
been very moderate?

"_Query II._ How can other Princes, and especially our fellow
Protestants, think us sincere in what we have made them believe as to
our zeal in spending millions of lives and money for to secure the
Protestant interest only in one single branch of it, _I mean the
Protestant succession here_, when they see that that succession has
hardly taken place, before we, only for sixty odd thousand pounds, (for
let us always remember that this paltry sum was the first pretence for
our quarrelling with Sweden) go about to undermine the very foundation
of that interest in general, by helping, as we do, entirely to sacrifice
Sweden, the old and sincere protector of the Protestants, to its
neighbours, of which some are professed Papists, some worse, and some,
at least, but lukewarm Protestants?

"_Article XX._ Therefore, that a reciprocal faith of the Allies and
their perseverance in this agreement may appear ... both the
fore-mentioned kings mutually oblige themselves, and declare that ...
they will not depart a tittle from the genuine and common sense of all
and every article of this treaty under any pretences of friendship,
profit, former treaty, agreement, and promise, or upon any colour
whatsoever: but that they will most fully and readily, either by
themselves, or ministers, or subjects, put in execution whatsoever they
have promised in this treaty ... without any hesitation, exception, or
excuse....

"_Query I._ Inasmuch as this article sets forth that, at the time of
concluding of the treaty, we were under no engagement contrary to it,
and that it were highly unjust should we afterwards, and while this
treaty is in force, which is eighteen years after the day it was signed,
have entered into any such engagements, how can we justify to the world
our late proceedings against the King of Sweden, which naturally seem
the consequences of a treaty either of our own making with the enemies
of that Prince, _or of some Court or other that at present influences
our measures_?

"_Query II._ The words in this article ... how in the name of honour,
faith, and justice, do they agree with the _little and pitiful
pretences_ we now make use of, not only for not assisting Sweden,
pursuant to this treaty, _but even for going about so heartily as we do
to destroy it_?

"_Article XXI._ This defensive treaty shall last for eighteen years,
before the end of which the confederate kings may ... again treat.

"_Ratification of the abovesaid treaty._ We, having seen and considered
this treaty, have approved and confirmed the same in all and every
particular article and clause as by the present. We do approve the same
for us, our heirs, and successors; assuring and promising our princely
word that we shall perform and observe sincerely and in good earnest all
those things that are therein contained, for the better confirmation
whereof we have ordered our great seal of England to be put to these
presents, which were given at our palace of Kensington, 25th of
February, in the year of our Lord 1700, and in the 11th year of our
reign (Gulielmus Rex).[22]

"_Query._ How can any of us that declares himself for the late happy
revolution, and that is a true and grateful lover of King William's for
ever-glorious memory ... yet bear with the least patience, that the said
treaty should (that I may again use the words of the 20th article) be
_departed from, under any pretence of profit, or upon any colour
whatsoever_, especially so insignificant and trifling a one as that
which has been made use of for two years together to employ our ships,
our men, and our money, _to accomplish the ruin of Sweden_, that same
Sweden whose defence and preservation this great and wise monarch of
ours has so solemnly promised, and which he always looked upon to be of
the utmost necessity for to secure the Protestant interest in Europe?"

FOOTNOTE:

[22] The treaty was concluded at the Hague on the 6th and 16th January,
1700, and ratified by William III. on February 5th, 1700.




CHAPTER V


Before entering upon an analysis of the pamphlet headed, "_Truth is but
truth, as it is timed_," with which we shall conclude the _Introduction_
to the Diplomatic Revelations, some preliminary remarks on the general
history of Russian politics appear opportune.

The overwhelming influence of Russia has taken Europe at different
epochs by surprise, startled the peoples of the West, and been submitted
to as a fatality, or resisted only by convulsions. But alongside the
fascination exercised by Russia, there runs an ever-reviving scepticism,
dogging her like a shadow, growing with her growth, mingling shrill
notes of irony with the cries of agonising peoples, and mocking her very
grandeur as a histrionic attitude taken up to dazzle and to cheat. Other
empires have met with similar doubts in their infancy; Russia has become
a colossus without outliving them. She affords the only instance in
history of an immense empire, the very existence of whose power, even
after world-wide achievements, has never ceased to be treated like a
matter of faith rather than like a matter of fact. From the outset of
the eighteenth century to our days, no author, whether he intended to
exalt or to check Russia, thought it possible to dispense with first
proving her existence.

But whether we be spiritualists or materialists with respect to
Russia--whether we consider her power as a palpable fact, or as the mere
vision of the guilt-stricken consciences of the European peoples--the
question remains the same: "How did this power, or this phantom of a
power, contrive to assume such dimensions as to rouse on the one side
the passionate assertion, and on the other the angry denial of its
threatening the world with a rehearsal of Universal Monarchy?" At the
beginning of the eighteenth century Russia was regarded as a mushroom
creation extemporised by the genius of Peter the Great. Schloezer
thought it a discovery to have found out that she possessed a past; and
in modern times, writers, like Fallmerayer, unconsciously following in
the track beaten by Russian historians, have deliberately asserted that
the northern spectre which frightens the Europe of the nineteenth
century already overshadowed the Europe of the ninth century. With them
the policy of Russia begins with the first Ruriks, and has, with some
interruptions indeed, been systematically continued to the present hour.

Ancient maps of Russia are unfolded before us, displaying even larger
European dimensions than she can boast of now: her perpetual movement of
aggrandizement from the ninth to the eleventh century is anxiously
pointed out; we are shown Oleg launching 88,000 men against Byzantium,
fixing his shield as a trophy on the gate of that capital, and dictating
an ignominious treaty to the Lower Empire; Igor making it tributary;
Sviataslaff glorying, "the Greeks supply me with gold, costly stuffs,
rice, fruits and wine; Hungary furnishes cattle and horses; from Russia
I draw honey, wax, furs, and men"; Vladimir conquering the Crimea and
Livonia, extorting a daughter from the Greek Emperor, as Napoleon did
from the German Emperor, blending the military sway of a northern
conqueror with the theocratic despotism of the Porphyro-geniti, and
becoming at once the master of his subjects on earth, and their
protector in heaven.

Yet, in spite of the plausible parallelism suggested by these
reminiscences, the policy of the first Ruriks differs fundamentally from
that of modern Russia. It was nothing more nor less than the policy of
the German barbarians inundating Europe--the history of the modern
nations beginning only after the deluge has passed away. The Gothic
period of Russia in particular forms but a chapter of the Norman
conquests. As the empire of Charlemagne precedes the foundation of
modern France, Germany, and Italy, so the empire of the Ruriks precedes
the foundation of Poland, Lithuania, the Baltic Settlements, Turkey,
and Muscovy itself. The rapid movement of aggrandizement was not the
result of deep-laid schemes, but the natural offspring of the primitive
organization of Norman conquest--vassalship without fiefs, or fiefs
consisting only in tributes--the necessity of fresh conquests being kept
alive by the uninterrupted influx of new Varangian adventurers, panting
for glory and plunder. The chiefs, becoming anxious for repose, were
compelled by the Faithful Band to move on, and in Russian, as in French
Normandy, there arrived the moment when the chiefs despatched on new
predatory excursions their uncontrollable and insatiable
companions-in-arms with the single view to get rid of them. Warfare and
organization of conquest on the part of the first Ruriks differ in no
point from those of the Normans in the rest of Europe. If Slavonian
tribes were subjected not only by the sword, but also by mutual
convention, this singularity is due to the exceptional position of those
tribes, placed between a northern and eastern invasion, and embracing
the former as a protection from the latter. The same magic charm which
attracted other northern barbarians to the Rome of the West attracted
the Varangians to the Rome of the East. The very migration of the
Russian capital--Rurik fixing it at Novgorod, Oleg removing it to Kiev,
and Sviataslaff attempting to establish it in Bulgaria--proves beyond
doubt that the invader was only feeling his way, and considered Russia
as a mere halting-place from which to wander on in search of an empire
in the South. If modern Russia covets the possession of Constantinople
to establish her dominion over the world, the Ruriks were, on the
contrary, forced by the resistance of Byzantium, under Zimiskes,
definitively to establish their dominion in Russia.

It may be objected that victors and vanquished amalgamated more quickly
in Russia than in any other conquest of the northern barbarians, that
the chiefs soon commingled themselves with the Slavonians--as shown by
their marriages and their names. But then, it should be recollected that
the Faithful Band, which formed at once their guard and their privy
council, remained exclusively composed of Varangians; that Vladimir,
who marks the summit, and Yaroslav, who marks the commencing decline of
Gothic Russia, were seated on her throne by the arms of the Varangians.
If any Slavonian influence is to be acknowledged in this epoch, it is
that of Novgorod, a Slavonian State, the traditions, policy, and
tendencies of which were so antagonistic to those of modern Russia that
the one could found her existence only on the ruins of the other. Under
Yaroslav the supremacy of the Varangians is broken, but simultaneously
with it disappears the conquering tendency of the first period, and the
decline of Gothic Russia begins. The history of that decline, more still
than that of the conquest and formation, proves the exclusively Gothic
character of the Empire of the Ruriks.

The incongruous, unwieldy, and precocious Empire heaped together by the
Ruriks, like the other empires of similar growth, is broken up into
appanages, divided and subdivided among the descendants of the
conquerors, dilacerated by feudal wars, rent to pieces by the
intervention of foreign peoples. The paramount authority of the Grand
Prince vanishes before the rival claims of seventy princes of the blood.
The attempt of Andrew of Susdal at recomposing some large limbs of the
empire by the removal of the capital from Kiev to Vladimir proves
successful only in propagating the decomposition from the South to the
centre. Andrew's third successor resigns even the last shadow of
supremacy, the title of Grand Prince, and the merely nominal homage
still offered him. The appanages to the South and to the West become by
turns Lithuanian, Polish, Hungarian, Livonian, Swedish. Kiev itself, the
ancient capital, follows destinies of its own, after having dwindled
down from a seat of the Grand Princedom to the territory of a city.
Thus, the Russia of the Normans completely disappears from the stage,
and the few weak reminiscences in which it still outlived itself,
dissolve before the terrible apparition of Genghis Khan. The bloody mire
of Mongolian slavery, not the rude glory of the Norman epoch, forms the
cradle of Muscovy, and modern Russia is but a metamorphosis of Muscovy.

The Tartar yoke lasted from 1237 to 1462--more than two centuries; a
yoke not only crushing, but dishonouring and withering the very soul of
the people that fell its prey. The Mongol Tartars established a rule of
systematic terror, devastation and wholesale massacre forming its
institutions. Their numbers being scanty in proportion to their enormous
conquests, they wanted to magnify them by a halo of consternation, and
to thin, by wholesale slaughter, the populations which might rise in
their rear. In their creations of desert they were, besides, led by the
same economical principle which has depopulated the Highlands of
Scotland and the Campagna di Roma--the conversion of men into sheep, and
of fertile lands and populous abodes into pasturage.

The Tartar yoke had already lasted a hundred years before Muscovy
emerged from its obscurity. To entertain discord among the Russian
princes, and secure their servile submission, the Mongols had restored
the dignity of the Grand Princedom. The strife among the Russian princes
for this dignity was, as a modern author has it, "an abject strife--the
strife of slaves, whose chief weapon was calumny, and who were always
ready to denounce each other to their cruel rulers; wrangling for a
degraded throne, whence they could not move but with plundering,
parricidal hands--hands filled with gold and stained with gore; which
they dared not ascend without grovelling, nor retain but on their knees,
prostrate and trembling beneath the scimitar of a Tartar, always ready
to roll under his feet those servile crowns, and the heads by which they
were worn." It was in this infamous strife that the Moscow branch won at
last the race. In 1328 the crown of the Grand Princedom, wrested from
the branch of Tver by dint of denunciation and assassination, was picked
up at the feet of Usbeck Khan by Yury, the elder brother of Ivan Kalita.
Ivan I. Kalita, and Ivan III., surnamed the Great, personate Muscovy
rising by means of the Tartar yoke, and Muscovy getting an independent
power by the disappearance of the Tartar rule. The whole policy of
Muscovy, from its first entrance into the historical arena, is resumed
in the history of these two individuals.

The policy of Ivan Kalita was simply this: to play the abject tool of
the Khan, thus to borrow his power, and then to turn it round upon his
princely rivals and his own subjects. To attain this end, he had to
insinuate himself with the Tartars by dint of cynical adulation, by
frequent journeys to the Golden Horde, by humble prayers for the hand of
Mongol princesses, by a display of unbounded zeal for the Khan's
interest, by the unscrupulous execution of his orders, by atrocious
calumnies against his own kinsfolk, by blending in himself the
characters of the Tartar's hangman, sycophant, and slave-in-chief. He
perplexed the Khan by continuous revelations of secret plots. Whenever
the branch of Tver betrayed a velleité of national independence, he
hurried to the Horde to denounce it. Wherever he met with resistance, he
introduced the Tartar to trample it down. But it was not sufficient to
act a character; to make it acceptable, gold was required. Perpetual
bribery of the Khan and his grandees was the only sure foundation upon
which to raise his fabric of deception and usurpation. But how was the
slave to get the money wherewith to bribe the master? He persuaded the
Khan to instal him his tax-gatherer throughout all the Russian
appanages. Once invested with this function, he extorted money under
false pretences. The wealth accumulated by the dread held out of the
Tartar name, he used to corrupt the Tartars themselves. By a bribe he
induced the primate to transfer his episcopal seat from Vladimir to
Moscow, thus making the latter the capital of the empire, because the
religious capital, and coupling the power of the Church with that of his
throne. By a bribe he allured the Boyards of the rival princes into
treason against their chiefs, and attracted them to himself as their
centre. By the joint influence of the Mahometan Tartar, the Greek
Church, and the Boyards, he unites the princes holding appanages into a
crusade against the most dangerous of them--the prince of Tver; and then
having driven his recent allies by bold attempts at usurpation into
resistance against himself, into a war for the public good, he draws not
the sword but hurries to the Khan. By bribes and delusion again, he
seduces him into assassinating his kindred rivals under the most cruel
torments. It was the traditional policy of the Tartar to check the
Russian princes the one by the other, to feed their dissensions, to
cause their forces to equiponderate, and to allow none to consolidate
himself. Ivan Kalita converts the Khan into the tool by which he rids
himself of his most dangerous competitors, and weighs down every
obstacle to his own usurping march. He does not conquer the appanages,
but surreptitiously turns the rights of the Tartar conquest to his
exclusive profit. He secures the succession of his son through the same
means by which he had raised the Grand Princedom of Muscovy, that
strange compound of princedom and serfdom. During his whole reign he
swerves not once from the line of policy he had traced to himself;
clinging to it with a tenacious firmness, and executing it with
methodical boldness. Thus he becomes the founder of the Muscovite power,
and characteristically his people call him Kalita--that is, the purse,
because it was the purse and not the sword with which he cut his way.
The very period of his reign witnesses the sudden growth of the
Lithuanian power which dismembers the Russian appanages from the West,
while the Tartar squeezes them into one mass from the East. Ivan, while
he dared not repulse the one disgrace, seemed anxious to exaggerate the
other. He was not to be seduced from following up his ends by the
allurements of glory, the pangs of conscience, or the lassitude of
humiliation. His whole system may be expressed in a few words: the
machiavelism of the usurping slave. His own weakness--his slavery--he
turned into the mainspring of his strength.

The policy traced by Ivan I. Kalita is that of his successors; they had
only to enlarge the circle of its application. They followed it up
laboriously, gradually, inflexibly. From Ivan I. Kalita, we may,
therefore, pass at once to Ivan III., surnamed the Great.

At the commencement of his reign (1462-1505) Ivan III. was still a
tributary to the Tartars; his authority was still contested by the
princes holding appanages; Novgorod, the head of the Russian republics,
reigned over the north of Russia; Poland-Lithuania was striving for the
conquest of Muscovy; lastly, the Livonian knights were not yet disarmed.
At the end of his reign we behold Ivan III. seated on an independent
throne, at his side the daughter of the last emperor of Byzantium, at
his feet Kasan, and the remnant of the Golden Horde flocking to his
court; Novgorod and the other Russian republics enslaved--Lithuania
diminished, and its king a tool in Ivan's hands--the Livonian knights
vanquished. Astonished Europe, at the commencement of Ivan's reign,
hardly aware of the existence of Muscovy, hemmed in between the Tartar
and the Lithuanian, was dazzled by the sudden appearance of an immense
empire on its eastern confines, and Sultan Bajazet himself, before whom
Europe trembled, heard for the first time the haughty language of the
Muscovite. How, then, did Ivan accomplish these high deeds? Was he a
hero? The Russian historians themselves show him up a confessed coward.

Let us shortly survey his principal contests, in the sequence in which
he undertook and concluded them--his contests with the Tartars, with
Novgorod, with the princes holding appanages, and lastly with
Lithuania-Poland.

Ivan rescued Muscovy from the Tartar yoke, not by one bold stroke, but
by the patient labour of about twenty years. He did not break the yoke,
but disengaged himself by stealth. Its overthrow, accordingly, has more
the look of the work of nature than the deed of man. When the Tartar
monster expired at last, Ivan appeared at its deathbed like a physician,
who prognosticated and speculated on death rather than like a warrior
who imparted it. The character of every people enlarges with its
enfranchisement from a foreign yoke; that of Muscovy in the hands of
Ivan seems to diminish. Compare only Spain in its struggles against the
Arabs with Muscovy in its struggles against the Tartars.

At the period of Ivan's accession to the throne, the Golden Horde had
long since been weakened, internally by fierce feuds, externally by the
separation from them of the Nogay Tartars, the eruption of Timour
Tamerlane, the rise of the Cossacks, and the hostility of the Crimean
Tartars. Muscovy, on the contrary, by steadily pursuing the policy
traced by Ivan Kalita, had grown to a mighty mass, crushed, but at the
same time compactly united by the Tartar chain. The Khans, as if struck
by a charm, had continued to remain instruments of Muscovite
aggrandizement and concentration. By calculation they had added to the
power of the Greek Church, which, in the hand of the Muscovite grand
princes, proved the deadliest weapon against them.

In rising against the Horde, the Muscovite had not to invent but only to
imitate the Tartars themselves. But Ivan did not rise. He humbly
acknowledged himself a slave of the Golden Horde. By bribing a Tartar
woman he seduced the Khan into commanding the withdrawal from Muscovy of
the Mongol residents. By similar and imperceptible and surreptitious
steps he duped the Khan into successive concessions, all ruinous to his
sway. He thus did not conquer, but filch strength. He does not drive,
but manoeuvre his enemy out of his strongholds. Still continuing to
prostrate himself before the Khan's envoys, and to proclaim himself his
tributary, he eludes the payment of the tribute under false pretences,
employing all the stratagems of a fugitive slave who dare not front his
owner, but only steal out of his reach. At last the Mongol awakes from
his torpor, and the hour of battle sounds. Ivan, trembling at the mere
semblance of an armed encounter, attempts to hide himself behind his own
fear, and to disarm the fury of his enemy by withdrawing the object upon
which to wreak his vengeance. He is only saved by the intervention of
the Crimean Tartars, his allies. Against a second invasion of the Horde,
he ostentatiously gathers together such disproportionate forces that the
mere rumour of their number parries the attack. At the third invasion,
from the midst of 200,000 men, he absconds a disgraced deserter.
Reluctantly dragged back, he attempts to haggle for conditions of
slavery, and at last, pouring into his army his own servile fear, he
involves it in a general and disorderly flight. Muscovy was then
anxiously awaiting its irretrievable doom, when it suddenly hears that
by an attack on their capital made by the Crimean Khan, the Golden Horde
has been forced to withdraw, and has, on its retreat, been destroyed by
the Cossacks and Nogay Tartars. Thus defeat was turned into success, and
Ivan had overthrown the Golden Horde, not by fighting it himself, but by
challenging it through a feigned desire of combat into offensive
movements, which exhausted its remnants of vitality and exposed it to
the fatal blows of the tribes of its own race whom he had managed to
turn into his allies. He caught one Tartar with another Tartar. As the
immense danger he had himself summoned proved unable to betray him into
one single trait of manhood, so his miraculous triumph did not infatuate
him even for one moment. With cautious circumspection he dared not
incorporate Kasan with Muscovy, but made it over to sovereigns belonging
to the family of Menghi-Ghirei, his Crimean ally, to hold it, as it
were, in trust for Muscovy. With the spoils of the vanquished Tartar, he
enchained the victorious Tartar. But if too prudent to assume, with the
eye-witnesses of his disgrace, the airs of a conqueror, this impostor
did fully understand how the downfall of the Tartar empire must dazzle
at a distance--with what halo of glory it would encircle him, and how it
would facilitate a magnificent entry among the European Powers.
Accordingly he assumed abroad the theatrical attitude of the conqueror,
and, indeed, succeeded in hiding under a mask of proud susceptibility
and irritable haughtiness the obtrusiveness of the Mongol serf, who
still remembered kissing the stirrup of the Khan's meanest envoy. He
aped in more subdued tone the voice of his old masters, which terrified
his soul. Some standing phrases of modern Russian diplomacy, such as the
magnanimity, the wounded dignity of the master, are borrowed from the
diplomatic instructions of Ivan III.

After the surrender of Kasan, he set out on a long-planned expedition
against Novgorod, the head of the Russian republics. If the overthrow of
the Tartar yoke was, in his eyes, the first condition of Muscovite
greatness, the overthrow of Russian freedom was the second. As the
republic of Viatka had declared itself neutral between Muscovy and the
Horde, and the republic of Tskof, with its twelve cities, had shown
symptoms of disaffection, Ivan flattered the latter and affected to
forget the former, meanwhile concentrating all his forces against
Novgorod the Great, with the doom of which he knew the fate of the rest
of the Russian republics to be sealed. By the prospect of sharing in
this rich booty, he drew after him the princes holding appanages, while
he inveigled the boyards by working upon their blind hatred of
Novgorodian democracy. Thus he contrived to march three armies upon
Novgorod and to overwhelm it by disproportionate force. But then, in
order not to keep his word to the princes, not to forfeit his immutable
"Vos non vobis," at the same time apprehensive, lest Novgorod should not
yet have become digestible from the want of preparatory treatment, he
thought fit to exhibit a sudden moderation; to content himself with a
ransom and the acknowledgment of his suzerainty; but into the act of
submission of the republic he smuggled some ambiguous words which made
him its supreme judge and legislator. Then he fomented the dissensions
between the patricians and plebeians raging as well in Novgorod as at
Florence. Of some complaints of the plebeians he took occasion to
introduce himself again into the city, to have its nobles, whom he knew
to be hostile to himself, sent to Moscow loaded with chains, and to
break the ancient law of the republic that "none of its citizens should
ever be tried or punished out of the limits of its own territory." From
that moment he became supreme arbiter. "Never," say the annalists,
"never since Rurik had such an event happened; never had the grand
princes of Kiev and Vladimir seen the Novgorodians come and submit to
them as their judges. Ivan alone could reduce Novgorod to that degree of
humiliation." Seven years were employed by Ivan to corrupt the republic
by the exercise of his judicial authority. Then, when he found its
strength worn out, he thought the moment ripe for declaring himself. To
doff his own mask of moderation, he wanted, on the part of Novgorod, a
breach of the peace. As he had simulated calm endurance, so he
simulated now a sudden burst of passion. Having bribed an envoy of the
republic to address him during a public audience with the name of
sovereign, he claimed, at once, all the rights of a despot--the
self-annihilation of the republic.




CHAPTER VI


One feature characteristic of the Slavonic race must strike every
observer. Almost everywhere it confined itself to an inland country,
leaving the sea-borders to non-Slavonic tribes. Finno-Tartaric tribes
held the shores of the Black Sea, Lithuanians and Fins those of the
Baltic and White Sea. Wherever they touched the sea-board, as in the
Adriatic and part of the Baltic, the Slavonians had soon to submit to
foreign rule. The Russian people shared this common fate of the
Slavonian race. Their home, at the time they first appear in history,
was the country about the sources and upper course of the Volga and its
tributaries, the Dnieper, Don, and Northern Dwina. Nowhere did their
territory touch the sea except at the extremity of the Gulf of Finland.
Nor had they before Peter the Great proved able to conquer any maritime
outlet beside that of the White Sea, which, during three-fourths of the
year, is itself enchained and immovable. The spot where Petersburg now
stands had been for a thousand years past contested ground between Fins,
Swedes, and Russians. All the remaining extent of coast from Polangen,
near Memel, to Torrea, the whole coast of the Black Sea, from Akerman to
Redut Kaleh, has been conquered later on. And, as if to witness the
anti-maritime peculiarity of the Slavonic race, of all this line of
coast, no portion of the Baltic coast has really adopted Russian
nationality. Nor has the Circassian and Mingrelian east coast of the
Black Sea. It is only the coast of the White Sea, as far as it was worth
cultivating, some portion of the northern coast of the Black Sea, and
part of the coast of the Sea of Azof, that have really been peopled with
Russian inhabitants, who, however, despite the new circumstances in
which they are placed, still refrain from taking to the sea, and
obstinately stick to the land-lopers' traditions of their ancestors.

From the very outset, Peter the Great broke through all the traditions
of the Slavonic race. "It is water that Russia wants." These words he
addressed as a rebuke to Prince Cantemir are inscribed on the title-page
of his life. The conquest of the Sea of Azof was aimed at in his first
war with Turkey, the conquest of the Baltic in his war against Sweden,
the conquest of the Black Sea in his second war against the Porte, and
the conquest of the Caspian Sea in his fraudulent intervention in
Persia. For a system of local encroachment, land was sufficient; for a
system of universal aggression, water had become indispensable. It was
but by the conversion of Muscovy from a country wholly of land into a
sea-bordering empire, that the traditional limits of the Muscovite
policy could be superseded and merged into that bold synthesis which,
blending the encroaching method of the Mongol slave with the
world-conquering tendencies of the Mongol master, forms the life-spring
of modern Russian diplomacy.

It has been said that no great nation has ever existed, or been able to
exist, in such an inland position as that of the original empire of
Peter the Great; that none has ever submitted thus to see its coasts and
the mouths of its rivers torn away from it; that Russia could no more
leave the mouth of the Neva, the natural outlet for the produce of
Northern Russia, in the hands of the Swedes, than the mouths of the Don,
Dnieper, and Bug, and the Straits of Kertch, in the hands of nomadic and
plundering Tartars; that the Baltic provinces, from their very
geographical configuration, are naturally a corollary to whichever
nation holds the country behind them; that, in one word, Peter, in this
quarter, at least, but took hold of what was absolutely necessary for
the natural development of his country. From this point of view, Peter
the Great intended, by his war against Sweden, only rearing a Russian
Liverpool, and endowing it with its indispensable strip of coast.

But then, one great fact is slighted over, the _tour de force_ by which
he transferred the capital of the Empire from the inland centre to the
maritime extremity, the characteristic boldness with which he erected
the new capital on the first strip of Baltic coast he conquered, almost
within gunshot of the frontier, thus deliberately giving his dominions
an _eccentric centre_. To transfer the throne of the Czars from Moscow
to Petersburg was to place it in a position where it could not be safe,
even from insult, until the whole coast from Libau to Tornea was
subdued--a work not completed till 1809, by the conquest of Finland.
"St. Petersburg is the window from which Russia can overlook Europe,"
said Algarotti. It was from the first a defiance to the Europeans, an
incentive to further conquest to the Russians. The fortifications in our
own days of Russian Poland are only a further step in the execution of
the same idea. Modlin, Warsaw, Ivangorod, are more than citadels to keep
a rebellious country in check. They are the same menace to the west
which Petersburg, in its immediate bearing, was a hundred years ago to
the north. They are to transform Russia into Panslavonia, as the Baltic
provinces were to transform Muscovy into Russia.

Petersburg, the _eccentric centre_ of the empire, pointed at once to a
periphery still to be drawn.

It is, then, not the mere conquest of the Baltic provinces which
separates the policy of Peter the Great from that of his ancestors, but
it is the transfer of the capital which reveals the true meaning of his
Baltic conquests. Petersburg was not like Muscovy, the centre of a race,
but the seat of a government; not the slow work of a people, but the
instantaneous creation of a man; not the medium from which the
peculiarities of an inland people radiate, but the maritime extremity
where they are lost; not the traditionary nucleus of a national
development, but the deliberately chosen abode of a cosmopolitan
intrigue. By the transfer of the capital, Peter cut off the natural
ligaments which bound up the encroaching system of the old Muscovite
Czars with the natural abilities and aspirations of the great Russian
race. By planting his capital on the margin of a sea, he put to open
defiance the anti-maritime instincts of that race, and degraded it to a
mere weight in his political mechanism. Since the 16th century Muscovy
had made no important acquisitions but on the side of Siberia, and to
the 16th century the dubious conquests made towards the west and the
south were only brought about by direct agency on the east. By the
transfer of the capital, Peter proclaimed that he, on the contrary,
intended working on the east and the immediately neighbouring countries
through the agency of the west. If the agency through the east was
narrowly circumscribed by the stationary character and the limited
relations of Asiatic peoples, the agency through the west became at once
illimited and universal from the movable character and the all-sided
relations of Western Europe. The transfer of the capital denoted this
intended change of agency, which the conquest of the Baltic provinces
afforded the means of achieving, by securing at once to Russia the
supremacy among the neighbouring Northern States; by putting it into
immediate and constant contact with all points of Europe; by laying the
basis of a material bond with the maritime Powers, which by this
conquest became dependent on Russia for their naval stores; a dependence
not existing as long as Muscovy, the country that produced the great
bulk of the naval stores, had got no outlets of its own; while Sweden,
the Power that held these outlets, had not got the country lying behind
them.

If the Muscovite Czars, who worked their encroachments by the agency
principally of the Tartar Khans, were obliged to _tartarize_ Muscovy,
Peter the Great, who resolved upon working through the agency of the
west, was obliged to _civilize_ Russia. In grasping upon the Baltic
provinces, he seized at once the tools necessary for this process. They
afforded him not only the diplomatists and the generals, the brains with
which to execute his system of political and military action on the
west, they yielded him, at the same time, a crop of bureaucrats,
schoolmasters, and drill-sergeants, who were to drill Russians into that
varnish of civilization that adapts them to the technical appliances of
the Western peoples, without imbuing them with their ideas.

Neither the Sea of Azof, nor the Black Sea, nor the Caspian Sea, could
open to Peter this direct passage to Europe. Besides, during his
lifetime still Taganrog, Azof, the Black Sea, with its new-formed
Russian fleets, ports, and dockyards, were again abandoned or given up
to the Turk. The Persian conquest, too, proved a premature enterprise.
Of the four wars which fill the military life of Peter the Great, his
first war, that against Turkey, the fruits of which were lost in a
second Turkish war, continued in one respect the traditionary struggle
with the Tartars. In another respect, it was but the prelude to the war
against Sweden, of which the second Turkish war forms an episode and the
Persian war an epilogue. Thus the war against Sweden, lasting during
twenty-one years, almost absorbs the military life of Peter the Great.
Whether we consider its purpose, its results, or its endurance, we may
justly call it _the_ war of Peter the Great. His whole creation hinges
upon the conquest of the Baltic coast.

Now, suppose we were altogether ignorant of the details of his
operations, military and diplomatic. The mere fact that the conversion
of Muscovy into Russia was brought about by its transformation from a
half-Asiatic inland country into the paramount maritime Power of the
Baltic, would it not enforce upon us the conclusion that England, the
greatest maritime Power of that epoch--a maritime Power lying, too, at
the very gates of the Baltic, where, since the middle of the 17th
century, she had maintained the attitude of supreme arbiter--that
England must have had her hand in this great change, that she must have
proved the main prop or the main impediment of the plans of Peter the
Great, that during the long protracted and deadly struggle between
Sweden and Russia she must have turned the balance, that if we do not
find her straining every nerve in order to save the Swede we may be sure
of her having employed all the means at her disposal for furthering the
Muscovite? And yet, in what is commonly called history, England does
hardly appear on the plan of this grand drama, and is represented as a
spectator rather than as an actor. Real history will show that the
Khans of the Golden Horde were no more instrumental in realizing the
plans of Ivan III. and his predecessors than the rulers of England were
in realizing the plans of Peter I. and his successors.

The pamphlets which we have reprinted, written as they were by English
contemporaries of Peter the Great, are far from concurring in the common
delusions of later historians. They emphatically denounce England as the
mightiest tool of Russia. The same position is taken up by the pamphlet
of which we shall now give a short analysis, and with which we shall
conclude the introduction to the diplomatic revelations. It is entitled,
"_Truth is but Truth as it is timed; or, our Ministry's present measures
against the Muscovite vindicated_, etc., etc. Humbly dedicated to the
House of C., London, 1719."

The former pamphlets we have reprinted, were written at, or shortly
after, the time when, to use the words of a modern admirer of Russia,
"Peter traversed the Baltic Sea as master at the head of the combined
squadrons of all the northern Powers, England included, which gloried in
sailing under his orders." In 1719, however, when _Truth is but Truth_
was published, the face of affairs seemed altogether changed. Charles
XII. was dead, and the English Government now pretended to side with
Sweden, and to wage war against Russia. There are other circumstances
connected with this anonymous pamphlet which claim particular notice. It
purports to be an extract from a relation, which, on his return from
Muscovy, in August, 1715, its author, by order of George I., drew up and
handed over to Viscount Townshend, then Secretary of State.


     "It happens," says he, "to be an advantage that at present I may
     own to have been the first so happy to foresee, or honest to
     forewarn our Court here, of the absolute necessity of our then
     breaking with the Czar, and shutting him out again of the Baltic."
     "My relation discovered his aim as to other States, and even to the
     German Empire, to which, although an inland Power, he had offered
     to annex Livonia as an Electorate, so that he could but be admitted
     as an elector. It drew attention to the Czar's then contemplated
     assumption of the title of Autocrator. Being head of the Greek
     Church he would be owned by the other potentates as head of the
     Greek Empire. I am not to say how reluctant we would be to
     acknowledge that title, since we have already made an ambassador
     treat him with the title of Imperial Majesty, which the Swede has
     never yet condescended to."


For some time attached to the British Embassy in Muscovy, our author, as
he states, was later on "_dismissed the service, because the Czar
desired it_," having made sure that


     "I had given our Court such light into his affairs as is contained
     in this paper; for which I beg leave to appeal to the King, and to
     vouch the Viscount Townshend, who heard his Majesty give that
     vindication." "And yet, notwithstanding all this, I have been for
     these five years past kept soliciting for a very long arrear still
     due, and whereof I contracted the greatest part in executing a
     commission for her late Majesty."


The anti-Muscovite attitude, suddenly assumed by the Stanhope Cabinet,
our author looks to in rather a sceptic mood.


     "I do not pretend to foreclose, by this paper, the Ministry of that
     applause due to them from the public, when they shall satisfy us as
     to what the motives were which made them, till but yesterday,
     straiten the Swede in everything, although then our ally as much as
     now; or strengthen, by all the ways they could, the Czar, although
     under no tie, but barely that of amity with Great Britain.... At
     the minute I write this I learn that the gentleman who brought the
     Muscovites, not yet three years ago, as a royal navy, not under our
     protection, on their first appearance in the Baltic, is again
     authorized by the persons now in power, to give the Czar a second
     meeting in these seas. For what reason or to what good end?"


The gentleman hinted at is Admiral Norris, whose Baltic campaign against
Peter I. seems, indeed, to be the original pattern upon which the recent
naval campaigns of Admirals Napier and Dundas were cut out.

The restoration to Sweden of the Baltic provinces is required by the
commercial as well as the political interest of Great Britain. Such is
the pith of our author's argument:


     "Trade is become the very life of our State; and what food is to
     life, naval stores are to a fleet. The whole trade we drive with
     all the other nations of the earth, at best, is but lucrative;
     this, of the north, is indispensably needful, and may not be
     improperly termed the _sacra embole_ of Great Britain, as being
     its chiefest foreign vent, for the support of all our trade, and
     our safety at home. As woollen manufactures and minerals are the
     staple commodities of Great Britain, so are likewise naval stores
     those of Muscovy, as also of all those very provinces in the Baltic
     which the Czar has so lately wrested from the crown of Sweden.
     Since those provinces have been in the Czar's possession, Pernan is
     entirely waste. At Revel we have not one British merchant left, and
     all the trade which was formerly at Narwa is now brought to
     Petersburg.... The Swede could never possibly engross the trade of
     our subjects, because those seaports in his hands were but so many
     thoroughfares from whence these commodities were uttered, the
     places of their produce or manufacture lying behind those ports, in
     the dominions of the Czar. But, if left to the Czar, these Baltic
     ports are no more thoroughfares, but peculiar magazines from the
     inland countries of the Czar's own dominions. Having already
     Archangel in the White Sea, to leave him but any seaport in the
     Baltic were to put no less in his hands than the _two keys of the
     general magazines of all the naval stores of Europe_; it being
     known that Danes, Swedes, Poles, and Prussians have but single and
     distinct branches of those commodities in their several dominions.
     If the Czar should thus engross 'the supply of what we cannot do
     without,' where then is our fleet? Or, indeed, where is the
     security for all our trade to any part of the earth besides?"


If, then, the interest of British commerce requires to exclude the Czar
from the Baltic, the interest of our State ought to be no less a spur to
quicken us to that attempt. By the interest of our State I would be
understood to mean neither the party measures of a Ministry, nor any
foreign motives of a Court, but precisely what is, and ever must be, the
immediate concern, either for the safety, ease, dignity, or emolument of
the Crown, as well as the common weal of Great Britain. With respect to
the Baltic, it has "from the earliest period of our naval power" always
been considered a fundamental interest of our State: first, to prevent
the rise there of any new maritime Power; and, secondly, to maintain the
balance of power between Denmark and Sweden.


     "One instance of the wisdom and foresight of our _then truly
     British statesmen_ is the peace at Stalboa, in the year 1617. James
     the First was the mediator of that treaty, by which the Muscovite
     was obliged to give up all the provinces which he then was
     possessed of in the Baltic, and to be barely an inland Power on
     this side of Europe."


The same policy of preventing a new maritime Power from starting in the
Baltic was acted upon by Sweden and Denmark.


     "Who knows not that the Emperor's attempt to get a seaport in
     Pomerania weighed no less with the great Gustavus than any other
     motive for carrying his arms even into the bowels of the house of
     Austria? What befel, at the times of Charles Gustavus, the crown of
     Poland itself, who, besides it being in those days by far the
     mightiest of any of the northern Powers, had then a long stretch of
     coast on, and some ports in, the Baltic? The Danes, though then in
     alliance with Poland, would never allow them, even for their
     assistance against the Swedes, to have a fleet in the Baltic, but
     destroyed the Polish ships wherever they could meet them."


As to the maintenance of the balance of power between the established
maritime States of the Baltic, the tradition of British policy is no
less clear. "When the Swedish power gave us some uneasiness there by
threatening to crush Denmark," the honour of our country was kept up by
retrieving the then inequality of the balance of power.

The Commonwealth of England sent in a squadron to the Baltic which
brought on the treaty of Roskild (1658), afterwards confirmed at
Copenhagen (1660). The fire of straw kindled by the Danes in the times
of King William III. was as speedily quenched by George Rock in the
treaty of Copenhagen.

Such was the hereditary British policy.


     "It never entered into the mind of the politicians of those times
     in order to bring the scale again to rights, to find out the happy
     _expedient of raising a third naval Power_ for framing a juster
     balance in the Baltic.... Who has taken this counsel against Tyre,
     the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers
     are the honourables of the earth? _Ego autem neminem nomino, quare
     irasci mihi nemo poterit, nisi qui ante de se noluerit confiteri._
     Posterity will be under some difficulty to believe that this could
     be the _work of any of the persons now in power_ ... that _we_ have
     opened; _St. Petersburg to the Czar solely at our own expense, and
     without any risk to him_...."


The safest line of policy would be to return to the treaty of Itolbowa,
and to suffer the Muscovite no longer "to nestle in the Baltic." Yet,
it may be said, that in "the present state of affairs" it would be
"difficult to retrieve the advantage we have lost by not curbing, when
it was more easy, the growth of the Muscovite power." A middle course
may be thought more convenient.


     "If we should find it consistent with the welfare of our State that
     the Muscovite have an inlet into the Baltic, as having, of all the
     princes of Europe, a country that can be made most beneficial to
     its prince, by uttering its produce to foreign markets. In this
     case, it were but reasonable to expect, on the other hand, that in
     return for our complying so far with his interest, for the
     improvement of his country, his Czarish Majesty, on his part,
     should demand nothing that may tend to the disturbance of another;
     and, therefore, contenting himself with ships of trade, should
     demand none of war."

     "We should thus preclude his hopes of being ever more than an
     inland Power," but "obviate every objection of using the Czar worse
     than any Sovereign Prince may expect. I shall not for this give an
     instance of a Republic of Genoa, or another in the Baltic itself,
     of the Duke of Courland; but will assign Poland and Prussia, who,
     though both now crowned heads, have ever contented themselves with
     the freedom of an open traffic, without insisting on a fleet. Or
     the treaty of Falczin, between the Turk and Muscovite, by which
     Peter was forced not only to restore Asoph, and to part with all
     his men-of-war in those parts, but also to content himself with the
     bare freedom of traffic in the Black Sea. Even an inlet in the
     Baltic for trade is much beyond what he could morally have promised
     himself not yet so long ago on the issue of his war with Sweden."


If the Czar refuse to agree to such "a healing temperament," we shall
have "nothing to regret but the time we lost to exert all the means that
Heaven has made us master of, to reduce him to a peace advantageous to
Great Britain." War would become inevitable. In that case


     "it ought no less to animate our Ministry to pursue their present
     measures, than fire with indignation the breast of every honest
     Briton that a Czar of Muscovy, who owes his naval skill to our
     instructions, and his grandeur to our forbearance, should so soon
     deny to Great Britain the terms which so few years ago he was fain
     to take up with from the Sublime Porte."

     "'Tis every way our interest to have the Swede restored to those
     provinces which the Muscovite has wrested from that crown in the
     Baltic. _Great Britain can no longer hold the balance in that
     sea_," since she "_has raised the Muscovite to be a maritime Power
     there_.... Had we performed the articles of our alliance made by
     King William with the crown of Sweden, that gallant nation would
     ever have been a bar strong enough against the Czar coming into the
     Baltic.... Time must confirm us, that the Muscovite's _expulsion
     from the Baltic_ is _now_ the principal end of our Ministry."
﻿REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION

Or

Germany in 1848

by

KARL MARX

Edited by Eleanor Marx Aveling







Chicago
Charles H. Kerr & Company
1912




NOTE BY THE EDITOR


The following articles are now, after forty-five years, for the first
time collected and printed in book form. They are an invaluable
pendant to Marx's work on the _coup d'état_ of Napoleon III. ("Der
Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte.") Both works belong to the
same period, and both are what Engels calls "excellent specimens of
that marvellous gift ... of Marx ... of apprehending clearly the
character, the significance, and the necessary consequences of great
historical events at a time when these events are actually in course
of taking place, or are only just completed."

These articles were written in 1851-1852, when Marx had been about
eighteen months in England. He was living with his wife, three young
children, and their life-long friend, Helene Demuth, in two rooms in
Dean Street, Soho, almost opposite the Royalty Theatre. For nearly ten
years they had been driven from pillar to post. When, in 1843, the
Prussian Government suppressed the _Rhenish Gazette_ which Marx had
edited, he went with his newly-married wife, Jenny von Westphalen, to
Paris. Not long after, his expulsion was demanded by the Prussian
Government--it is said that Alexander von Humboldt acted as the agent
of Prussia on this occasion--and M. Guizot was, of course, too polite
to refuse the request. Marx was expelled, and betook himself to
Brussels. Again the Prussian Government requested his expulsion, and
where the French Government had complied it was not likely the Belgian
would refuse. Marx received marching orders.

But at this same time the French Government that had expelled Marx had
gone the way of French Governments, and the new Provisional Government
through Ferdinand Flocon invited the "brave et loyal Marx" to return
to the country whence "tyranny had banished him, and where he, like
all fighting in the sacred cause, the cause of the fraternity of all
peoples," would be welcome. The invitation was accepted, and for some
months he lived in Paris. Then he returned to Germany in order to
start the _New Rhenish Gazette_ in Cologne. And the _Rhenish Gazette_
writers had very lively times. Marx was twice prosecuted, but as the
juries would not convict, the Prussian Government took the nearer way
and suppressed the paper.

Again Marx and his family returned to the country whose "doors" had
only a few short months before been "thrown open" to him. The sky had
changed--and the Government. "We remained in Paris," my mother says in
some biographical notes I have found, "a month. Here also there was to
be no resting-place for us. One fine morning the familiar figure of
the sergeant of police appeared with the announcement that Karl 'et sa
dame' must leave Paris within twenty-four hours. We were graciously
told we might be interned at Vannes in the Morbihan. Of course we
could not accept such an exile as that, and I again gathered together
my small belongings to seek a safe haven in London. Karl had hastened
thither before us." The "us" were my mother, Helene Demuth, and the
three little children, Jenny (Madame Longuet), Laura (Madame
Lafargue), and Edgar, who died at the age of eight.

The haven was safe indeed. But it was storm-tossed. Hundreds of
refugees--all more or less destitute--were now in London. There
followed years of horrible poverty, of bitter suffering--such
suffering as can only be known to the penniless stranger in a strange
land. The misery would have been unendurable but for the faith that
was in these men and women, and but for their invincible "Humor." I
use the German word because I know no English one that quite expresses
the same thing--such a combination of humor and good-humor, of
light-hearted courage, and high spirits.

That readers of these articles may have some idea of the conditions
under which Marx was working, under which he wrote them and the
"Achtzehnte Brumaire," and was preparing his first great economical
work, "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oeconomie" (published in 1859), I
again quote from my mother's notes. Soon after the arrival of the
family a second son was born. He died when about two years old. Then a
fifth child, a little girl, was born. When about a year old, she too
fell sick and died. "Three days," writes my mother, "the poor child
wrestled with death. She suffered so.... Her little dead body lay in
the small back room; we all of us" (i.e., my parents, Helene Demuth,
and the three elder children) "went into the front room, and when
night came we made us beds on the floor, the three living children
lying by us. And we wept for the little angel resting near us, cold
and dead. The death of the dear child came in the time of our
bitterest poverty. Our German friends could not help us; Engels, after
vainly trying to get literary work in London, had been obliged to go,
under very disadvantageous conditions, into his father's firm, as a
clerk, in Manchester; Ernest Jones, who often came to see us at this
time, and had promised help, could do nothing.... In the anguish of my
heart I went to a French refugee who lived near, and who had sometimes
visited us. I told him our sore need. At once with the friendliest
kindness he gave me £2. With that we paid for the little coffin in
which the poor child now sleeps peacefully. I had no cradle for her
when she was born, and even the last small resting-place was long
denied her." ... "It was a terrible time," Liebknecht writes to me
(the Editor), "but it was grand nevertheless."

In that "front room" in Dean Street, the children playing about him,
Marx worked. I have heard tell how the children would pile up chairs
behind him to represent a coach, to which he was harnessed as horse,
and would "whip him up" even as he sat at his desk writing.

Marx had been recommended to Mr. C. A. Dana,[1] the managing director
of the _New York Tribune_, by Ferdinand Freiligrath, and the first
contributions sent by him to America are the series of letters on
Germany here reprinted. They seem to have created such a sensation
that before the series had been completed Marx was engaged as regular
London correspondent. On the 12th of March, 1852, Mr. Dana wrote: "It
may perhaps give you pleasure to know that they" (i.e., the "Germany"
letters) "are read with satisfaction by a considerable number of
persons, and are widely reproduced." From this time on, with short
intervals, Marx not only sent letters regularly to the New York paper;
he wrote a large number of leading articles for it. "Mr. Marx," says
an editorial note in 1853, "has indeed opinions of his own, with some
of which we are far from agreeing; but those who do not read his
letters neglect one of the most instructive sources of information on
the great questions of European politics."

Not the least remarkable among these contributions were those dealing
with Lord Palmerston and the Russian Government. "Urquhart's writings
on Russia," says Marx, "had interested but not convinced me. In order
to arrive at a definite opinion, I made a minute analysis of Hansard's
Parliamentary Debates, and of the Diplomatic Blue Books from 1807 to
1850. The first fruits of these studies was a series of articles in
the _New York Tribune_, in which I proved Palmerston's relations with
the Russian Government.... Shortly after, these studies were reprinted
in the Chartist organ edited by Ernest Jones, _The People's Paper_....
Meantime the Glasgow _Sentinel_ had reproduced one of these articles,
and part of it was issued in pamphlet form by Mr. Tucker, London."[2]
And the Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee thanked Marx for the
"great public service rendered by the admirable _exposé_" in his "Kars
papers," published both in the _New York Tribune_ and the _People's
Paper_. A large number of articles on the subject were also printed in
the _Free Press_ by Marx's old friend, C. D. Collett. I hope to
republish these and other articles.

As to the _New York Tribune_, it was at this time an admirably edited
paper, with an immense staff of distinguished contributors,[3] both
American and European. It was a passionate anti-slavery organ, and
also recognized that there "was need for a true organization of
society," and that "our evils" were "social, not political." The
paper, and especially Marx's articles, were frequently referred to in
the House of Commons, notably by John Bright.

It may also interest readers to know what Marx was paid for his
articles--many of them considerably longer even than those here
collected. He received £1 for each contribution--not exactly brilliant
remuneration.

It will be noted that the twentieth chapter, promised in the
nineteenth, does not appear. It may have been written, but was
certainly not printed. It was probably crowded out. "I do not know,"
wrote Mr. Dana, "how long you intend to make the series, and under
ordinary circumstances I should desire to have it prolonged as much as
possible. But we have a presidential election at hand, which will
occupy our columns to a great extent.... Let me suggest to you if
possible to condense your survey ... into say half a dozen more
articles" (eleven had then been received by Mr. Dana). "Do not,
however, close it without an exposition of the forces now remaining at
work there (Germany) and active in the preparation of the future."
This "exposition" will be found in the article which I have added to
the "Germany" series, on the "Cologne Communist Trial." That trial
really gives a complete picture of the conditions of Germany under the
triumphant Counter-Revolution.

Marx himself nowhere says the series of letters is incomplete,
although he occasionally refers to them. Thus in the letter on the
Cologne trial he speaks of the articles, and in 1853 writes: "Those of
your readers who, having read my letters on the German Revolution and
Counter-Revolution written for the _Tribune_ some two years ago,
desire to have an immediate intuition of it, will do well to inspect
the picture by Mr. Hasenclever now being exhibited in ... New York ...
representing the presentation of a workingmen's petition to the
magistrates of Düsseldorf in 1848. What the writer could only analyze,
the eminent painter has reproduced in its dramatic vitality."

Finally, I would remind English readers that these articles were
written when Marx had only been some eighteen months in England, and
that he never had any opportunity of reading the proofs. Nevertheless,
it has not seemed to me that anything needed correction. I have
therefore only removed a few obvious printer's errors.

The date at the head of each chapter refers to the issue of the
_Tribune_ in which the article appeared, that at the end to the time
of writing. I am alone responsible for the headings of the letters as
published in this volume.

                                     ELEANOR MARX AVELING.
      _Sydenham, April, 1896._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Mr. C. A. Dana was at this time still in sympathy with Socialism.
The effects of Brook Farm had not yet worn off.

[2] "Herr Vogt," pp. 59 and 185. London, 1860.

[3] Including Bruno Bauer, Bayard Taylor, Ripley, and many of the
Brook Farmers. The editor was Horace Greeley.




CONTENTS


                                                 Page

           NOTE BY THE EDITOR                       3

        I. GERMANY AT THE OUTBREAK OF THE
           REVOLUTION                              13

       II. THE PRUSSIAN STATE                      28

      III. THE OTHER GERMAN STATES                 44

       IV. AUSTRIA                                 52

        V. THE VIENNA INSURRECTION                 62

       VI. THE BERLIN INSURRECTION                 68

      VII. THE FRANKFORT NATIONAL ASSEMBLY         76

     VIII. POLES, TSCHECHS, AND GERMANS            84

       IX. PANSLAVISM; THE SCHLESWIG WAR           91

        X. THE PARIS RISING; THE FRANKFORT
           ASSEMBLY                                98

       XI. THE VIENNA INSURRECTION                105

      XII. THE STORMING OF VIENNA: THE
           BETRAYAL OF VIENNA                     114

     XIII. THE PRUSSIAN ASSEMBLY: THE NATIONAL
           ASSEMBLY                               128

      XIV. THE RESTORATION OF ORDER: DIET
           AND CHAMBER                            136

       XV. THE TRIUMPH OF PRUSSIA                 144

      XVI. THE ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENTS       151

     XVII. INSURRECTION                           158

    XVIII. PETTY TRADERS                          166

      XIX. THE CLOSE OF THE INSURRECTION          174

       XX. THE LATE TRIAL AT COLOGNE              183




REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION




I.

GERMANY AT THE OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION.


                                          OCTOBER 25, 1851.

The first act of the revolutionary drama on the continent of Europe
has closed. The "powers that were" before the hurricane of 1848 are
again the "powers that be," and the more or less popular rulers of a
day, provisional governors, triumvirs, dictators, with their tail of
representatives, civil commissioners, military commissioners,
prefects, judges, generals, officers, and soldiers, are thrown upon
foreign shores, and "transported beyond the seas" to England or
America, there to form new governments _in partibus infidelium_,
European committees, central committees, national committees, and to
announce their advent with proclamations quite as solemn as those of
any less imaginary potentates.

A more signal defeat than that undergone by the continental
revolutionary party--or rather parties--upon all points of the line of
battle, cannot be imagined. But what of that? Has not the struggle of
the British middle classes for their social and political supremacy
embraced forty-eight, that of the French middle classes forty years of
unexampled struggles? And was their triumph ever nearer than at the
very moment when restored monarchy thought itself more firmly settled
than ever? The times of that superstition which attributed revolutions
to the ill-will of a few agitators have long passed away. Everyone
knows nowadays that wherever there is a revolutionary convulsion,
there must be some social want in the background, which is prevented,
by outworn institutions, from satisfying itself. The want may not yet
be felt as strongly, as generally, as might ensure immediate success;
but every attempt at forcible repression will only bring it forth
stronger and stronger, until it bursts its fetters. If, then, we have
been beaten, we have nothing else to do but to begin again from the
beginning. And, fortunately, the probably very short interval of rest
which is allowed us between the close of the first and the beginning
of the second act of the movement, gives us time for a very necessary
piece of work: the study of the causes that necessitated both the late
outbreak and its defeat; causes that are not to be sought for in the
accidental efforts, talents, faults, errors, or treacheries of some of
the leaders, but in the general social state and conditions of
existence of each of the convulsed nations. That the sudden movements
of February and March, 1848, were not the work of single individuals,
but spontaneous, irresistible manifestations of national wants and
necessities, more or less clearly understood, but very distinctly felt
by numerous classes in every country, is a fact recognized everywhere;
but when you inquire into the causes of the counter-revolutionary
successes, there you are met on every hand with the ready reply that
it was Mr. This or Citizen That who "betrayed" the people. Which reply
may be very true or not, according to circumstances, but under no
circumstances does it explain anything--not even show how it came to
pass that the "people" allowed themselves to be thus betrayed. And
what a poor chance stands a political party whose entire
stock-in-trade consists in a knowledge of the solitary fact that
Citizen So-and-so is not to be trusted.

The inquiry into, and the exposition of, the causes, both of the
revolutionary convulsion and its suppression, are, besides, of
paramount importance from a historical point of view. All these petty,
personal quarrels and recriminations--all these contradictory
assertions that it was Marrast, or Ledru Rollin, or Louis Blanc, or
any other member of the Provisional Government, or the whole of them,
that steered the Revolution amidst the rocks upon which it
foundered--of what interest can they be, what light can they afford,
to the American or Englishman who observed all these various movements
from a distance too great to allow of his distinguishing any of the
details of operations? No man in his senses will ever believe that
eleven men,[4] mostly of very indifferent capacity either for good or
evil, were able in three months to ruin a nation of thirty-six
millions, unless those thirty-six millions saw as little of their way
before them as the eleven did. But how it came to pass that thirty-six
millions were at once called upon to decide for themselves which way
to go, although partly groping in dim twilight, and how then they got
lost and their old leaders were for a moment allowed to return to
their leadership, that is just the question.

If, then, we try to lay before the readers of _The Tribune_ the causes
which, while they necessitated the German Revolution of 1848, led
quite as inevitably to its momentary repression in 1849 and 1850, we
shall not be expected to give a complete history of events as they
passed in that country. Later events, and the judgment of coming
generations, will decide what portion of that confused mass of
seemingly accidental, incoherent, and incongruous facts is to form a
part of the world's history. The time for such a task has not yet
arrived; we must confine ourselves to the limits of the possible, and
be satisfied, if we can find rational causes, based upon undeniable
facts, to explain the chief events, the principal vicissitudes of that
movement, and to give us a clue as to the direction which the next,
and perhaps not very distant, outbreak will impart to the German
people.

And firstly, what was the state of Germany at the outbreak of the
Revolution?

The composition of the different classes of the people which form the
groundwork of every political organization was, in Germany, more
complicated than in any other country. While in England and France
feudalism was entirely destroyed, or, at least, reduced, as in the
former country, to a few insignificant forms, by a powerful and
wealthy middle class, concentrated in large towns, and particularly in
the capital, the feudal nobility in Germany had retained a great
portion of their ancient privileges. The feudal system of tenure was
prevalent almost everywhere. The lords of the land had even retained
the jurisdiction over their tenants. Deprived of their political
privileges, of the right to control the princes, they had preserved
almost all their Mediæval supremacy over the peasantry of their
demesnes, as well as their exemption from taxes. Feudalism was more
flourishing in some localities than in others, but nowhere except on
the left bank of the Rhine was it entirely destroyed. This feudal
nobility, then extremely numerous and partly very wealthy, was
considered, officially, the first "Order" in the country. It furnished
the higher Government officials, it almost exclusively officered the
army.

The bourgeoisie of Germany was by far not as wealthy and concentrated
as that of France or England. The ancient manufactures of Germany had
been destroyed by the introduction of steam, and the rapidly extending
supremacy of English manufactures; the more modern manufactures,
started under the Napoleonic continental system, established in other
parts of the country, did not compensate for the loss of the old ones,
nor suffice to create a manufacturing interest strong enough to force
its wants upon the notice of Governments jealous of every extension of
non-noble wealth and power. If France carried her silk manufactures
victorious through fifty years of revolutions and wars, Germany,
during the same time, all but lost her ancient linen trade. The
manufacturing districts, besides, were few and far between; situated
far inland, and using, mostly, foreign, Dutch, or Belgian ports for
their imports and exports, they had little or no interest in common
with the large seaport towns on the North Sea and the Baltic; they
were, above all, unable to create large manufacturing and trading
centres, such as Paris and Lyons, London and Manchester. The causes of
this backwardness of German manufactures were manifold, but two will
suffice to account for it: the unfavorable geographical situation of
the country, at a distance from the Atlantic, which had become the
great highway for the world's trade, and the continuous wars in which
Germany was involved, and which were fought on her soil, from the
sixteenth century to the present day. It was this want of numbers, and
particularly of anything like concentrated numbers, which prevented
the German middle classes from attaining that political supremacy
which the English bourgeoisie has enjoyed ever since 1688, and which
the French conquered in 1789. And yet, ever since 1815, the wealth,
and with the wealth the political importance of the middle class in
Germany, was continually growing. Governments were, although
reluctantly, compelled to bow, at least to its more immediate material
interests. It may even be truly said that from 1815 to 1830, and from
1832 to 1840, every particle of political influence, which, having
been allowed to the middle class in the constitutions of the smaller
States, was again wrested from them during the above two periods of
political reaction, that every such particle was compensated for by
some more practical advantage allowed to them. Every political defeat
of the middle class drew after it a victory on the field of commercial
legislation. And certainly, the Prussian Protective Tariff of 1818,
and the formation of the Zollverein,[5] were worth a good deal more to
the traders and manufacturers of Germany than the equivocal right of
expressing in the chambers of some diminutive dukedom their want of
confidence in ministers who laughed at their votes. Thus, with
growing wealth and extending trade, the bourgeoisie soon arrived at a
stage where it found the development of its most important interests
checked by the political constitution of the country; by its random
division among thirty-six princes with conflicting tendencies and
caprices; by the feudal fetters upon agriculture and the trade
connected with it; by the prying superintendence to which an ignorant
and presumptuous bureaucracy subjected all its transactions. At the
same time the extension and consolidation of the Zollverein, the
general introduction of steam communication, the growing competition
in the home trade, brought the commercial classes of the different
States and Provinces closer together, equalized their interests and
centralized their strength. The natural consequence was the passing of
the whole mass of them into the camp of the Liberal Opposition, and
the gaining of the first serious struggle of the German middle class
for political power. This change may be dated from 1840, from the
moment when the bourgeoisie of Prussia assumed the lead of the middle
class movement of Germany. We shall hereafter revert to this Liberal
Opposition movement of 1840-1847.

The great mass of the nation, which neither belonged to the nobility
nor to the bourgeoisie, consisted in the towns of the small trading
and shopkeeping class and the working people, and in the country of
the peasantry.

The small trading and shopkeeping class is exceedingly numerous in
Germany, in consequence of the stinted development which the large
capitalists and manufacturers as a class have had in that country. In
the larger towns it forms almost the majority of the inhabitants; in
the smaller ones it entirely predominates, from the absence of
wealthier competitors or influence. This class, a most important one
in every modern body politic, and in all modern revolutions, is still
more important in Germany, where, during the recent struggles, it
generally played the decisive part. Its intermediate position between
the class of larger capitalists, traders, and manufacturers, the
bourgeoisie properly so-called, and the proletarian or industrial
class, determines its character. Aspiring to the position of the
first, the least adverse turn of fortune hurls the individuals of this
class down into the ranks of the second. In monarchical and feudal
countries the custom of the court and aristocracy becomes necessary to
its existence; the loss of this custom might ruin a great part of it.
In the smaller towns a military garrison, a county government, a court
of law with its followers, form very often the base of its prosperity;
withdraw these, and down go the shopkeepers, the tailors, the
shoemakers, the joiners. Thus eternally tossed about between the hope
of entering the ranks of the wealthier class, and the fear of being
reduced to the state of proletarians or even paupers; between the hope
of promoting their interests by conquering a share in the direction of
public affairs, and the dread of rousing, by ill-timed opposition, the
ire of a Government which disposes of their very existence, because
it has the power of removing their best customers; possessed of small
means, the insecurity of the possession of which is in the inverse
ratio of the amount,--this class is extremely vacillating in its
views. Humble and crouchingly submissive under a powerful feudal or
monarchical Government, it turns to the side of Liberalism when the
middle class is in the ascendant; it becomes seized with violent
democratic fits as soon as the middle class has secured its own
supremacy, but falls back into the abject despondency of fear as soon
as the class below itself, the proletarians, attempts an independent
movement. We shall by and by see this class, in Germany, pass
alternately from one of these stages to the other.

The working class in Germany is, in its social and political
development, as far behind that of England and France as the German
bourgeoisie is behind the bourgeoisie of those countries. Like master,
like man. The evolution of the conditions of existence for a numerous,
strong, concentrated, and intelligent proletarian class goes hand in
hand with the development of the conditions of existence for a
numerous, wealthy, concentrated, and powerful middle class. The
working class movement itself never is independent, never is of an
exclusively proletarian character until all the different factions of
the middle class, and particularly its most progressive faction, the
large manufacturers, have conquered political power, and remodelled
the State according to their wants. It is then that the inevitable
conflict between the employer and the employed becomes imminent, and
cannot be adjourned any longer; that the working class can no longer
be put off with delusive hopes and promises never to be realized; that
the great problem of the nineteenth century, the abolition of the
proletariat, is at last brought forward fairly and in its proper
light. Now, in Germany the mass of the working class were employed,
not by those modern manufacturing lords of which Great Britain
furnishes such splendid specimens, but by small tradesmen, whose
entire manufacturing system is a mere relic of the Middle Ages. And as
there is an enormous difference between the great cotton lord and the
petty cobbler or master tailor, so there is a corresponding distance
from the wide-awake factory operative of modern manufacturing Babylons
to the bashful journeyman tailor or cabinetmaker of a small country
town, who lives in circumstances and works after a plan very little
different from those of the like sort of men some five hundred years
ago. This general absence of modern conditions of life, of modern
modes of industrial production, of course was accompanied by a
pretty equally general absence of modern ideas, and it is, therefore,
not to be wondered at if, at the outbreak of the Revolution, a large
part of the working classes should cry out for the immediate
re-establishment of guilds and Mediæval privileged trades' corporations.
Yet from the manufacturing districts, where the modern system of
production predominated, and in consequence of the facilities of
inter-communication and mental development afforded by the migratory
life of a large number of the working men, a strong nucleus formed
itself, whose ideas about the emancipation of their class were far
clearer and more in accordance with existing facts and historical
necessities; but they were a mere minority. If the active movement of
the middle class may be dated from 1840, that of the working class
commences its advent by the insurrections of the Silesian and Bohemian
factory operatives in 1844, and we shall soon have occasion to pass in
review the different stages through which this movement passed.

Lastly, there was the great class of the small farmers, the peasantry,
which with its appendix of farm laborers, constitutes a considerable
majority of the entire nation. But this class again sub-divided itself
into different fractions. There were, firstly, the more wealthy
farmers, what is called in Germany _Gross_ and _Mittel-Bauern_,
proprietors of more or less extensive farms, and each of them
commanding the services of several agricultural laborers. This class,
placed between the large untaxed feudal landowners, and the smaller
peasantry and farm laborers, for obvious reasons found in an alliance
with the anti-feudal middle class of the towns its most natural
political course. Then there were, secondly, the small freeholders,
predominating in the Rhine country, where feudalism had succumbed
before the mighty strokes of the great French Revolution. Similar
independent small freeholders also existed here and there in other
provinces, where they had succeeded in buying off the feudal charges
formerly due upon their lands. This class, however, was a class of
freeholders by name only, their property being generally mortgaged to
such an extent, and under such onerous conditions, that not the
peasant, but the usurer who had advanced the money, was the real
landowner. Thirdly, the feudal tenants, who could not be easily turned
out of their holdings, but who had to pay a perpetual rent, or to
perform in perpetuity a certain amount of labor in favor of the lord
of the manor. Lastly, the agricultural laborers, whose condition, in
many large farming concerns, was exactly that of the same class in
England, and who in all cases lived and died poor, ill-fed, and the
slaves of their employers. These three latter classes of the
agricultural population, the small freeholders, the feudal tenants,
and the agricultural laborers, never troubled their heads much about
politics before the Revolution, but it is evident that this event must
have opened to them a new career, full of brilliant prospects. To
every one of them the Revolution offered advantages, and the movement
once fairly engaged in, it was to be expected that each, in their
turn, would join it. But at the same time it is quite as evident, and
equally borne out by the history of all modern countries, that the
agricultural population, in consequence of its dispersion over a great
space, and of the difficulty of bringing about an agreement among any
considerable portion of it, never can attempt a successful
independent movement; they require the initiatory impulse of the more
concentrated, more enlightened, more easily moved people of the towns.

The preceding short sketch of the most important of the classes, which
in their aggregate formed the German nation at the outbreak of the
recent movements, will already be sufficient to explain a great part
of the incoherence, incongruence, and apparent contradiction which
prevailed in that movement. When interests so varied, so conflicting,
so strangely crossing each other, are brought into violent collision;
when these contending interests in every district, every province, are
mixed in different proportions; when, above all, there is no great
centre in the country, no London, no Paris, the decisions of which, by
their weight, may supersede the necessity of fighting out the same
quarrel over and over again in every single locality; what else is to
be expected but that the contest will dissolve itself into a mass of
unconnected struggles, in which an enormous quantity of blood, energy,
and capital is spent, but which for all that remain without any
decisive results?

The political dismemberment of Germany into three dozen of more or
less important principalities is equally explained by this confusion
and multiplicity of the elements which compose the nation, and which
again vary in every locality. Where there are no common interests
there can be no unity of purpose, much less of action. The German
Confederation, it is true, was declared everlastingly indissoluble;
yet the Confederation, and its organ, the Diet, never represented
German unity. The very highest pitch to which centralization was ever
carried in Germany was the establishment of the Zollverein; by this
the States on the North Sea were also forced into a Customs Union of
their own, Austria remaining wrapped up in her separate prohibitive
tariff. Germany had the satisfaction to be, for all practical purposes
divided between three independent powers only, instead of between
thirty-six. Of course the paramount supremacy of the Russian Czar, as
established in 1814, underwent no change on this account.

Having drawn these preliminary conclusions from our premises, we shall
see, in our next, how the aforesaid various classes of the German
people were set into movement one after the other, and what character
the movement assumed on the outbreak of the French Revolution of 1848.

LONDON, September, 1851.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] The "eleven men" were: Dupont de l'Eure, Lamartine, Crémieux,
Aarago, Ledru Rollin, Garnier-Pages, Marrast, Clocon, Louis Blanc, and
Albert.

[5] The "Zollverein" was the German Customs Union. It was originally
founded in 1827, and largely extended after the war of 1866. Since the
unification of Germany as an "Empire" in 1871, the States belonging to
the Zollverein have been included in the German Empire. The object of
the Zollverein was to obtain a uniform rate of customs duties all over
Germany.




II.

THE PRUSSIAN STATE.


                                          OCTOBER 28th, 1851.

The political movement of the middle class or bourgeoisie, in Germany,
may be dated from 1840. It had been preceded by symptoms showing that
the moneyed and industrial class of that country was ripening into a
state which would no longer allow it to continue apathetic and passive
under the pressure of a half-feudal, half-bureaucratic Monarchism. The
smaller princes of Germany, partly to insure to themselves a greater
independence against the supremacy of Austria and Prussia, or against
the influence of the nobility of their own States, partly in order to
consolidate into a whole the disconnected provinces united under their
rule by the Congress of Vienna, one after the other granted
constitutions of a more or less liberal character. They could do so
without any danger to themselves; for if the Diet of the
Confederation, this mere puppet of Austria and Prussia, was to
encroach upon their independence as sovereigns, they knew that in
resisting its dictates they would be backed by public opinion and the
Chambers; and if, on the contrary, these Chambers grew too strong,
they could readily command the power of the Diet to break down all
opposition. The Bavarian, Würtemberg, Baden or Hanoverian
Constitutional institutions could not, under such circumstances, give
rise to any serious struggle for political power, and, therefore, the
great bulk of the German middle class kept very generally aloof from
the petty squabbles raised in the Legislatures of the small States,
well knowing that without a fundamental change in the policy and
constitution of the two great powers of Germany, no secondary efforts
and victories would be of any avail. But, at the same time, a race of
Liberal lawyers, professional oppositionists, sprung up in these small
assemblies: the Rottecks, the Welckers, the Roemers, the Jordans, the
Stüves, the Eisenmanns, those great "popular men" (_Volksmänner_) who,
after a more or less noisy, but always unsuccessful, opposition of
twenty years, were carried to the summit of power by the revolutionary
springtide of 1848, and who, after having there shown their utter
impotency and insignificance, were hurled down again in a moment.
These first specimen upon German soil of the trader in politics and
opposition, by their speeches and writings made familiar to the German
ear the language of Constitutionalism, and by their very existence
foreboded the approach of a time when the middle class would seize
upon and restore to their proper meaning political phrases which these
talkative attorneys and professors were in the habit of using without
knowing much about the sense originally attached to them.

German literature, too, labored under the influence of the political
excitement into which all Europe had been thrown by the events of
1830. A crude Constitutionalism, or a still cruder Republicanism, were
preached by almost all writers of the time. It became more and more
the habit, particularly of the inferior sorts of literati, to make up
for the want of cleverness in their productions, by political
allusions which were sure to attract attention. Poetry, novels,
reviews, the drama, every literary production teemed with what was
called "tendency," that is with more or less timid exhibitions of an
anti-governmental spirit. In order to complete the confusion of ideas
reigning after 1830 in Germany, with these elements of political
opposition there were mixed up ill-digested university-recollections
of German philosophy, and misunderstood gleanings from French
Socialism, particularly Saint-Simonism; and the clique of writers who
expatiated upon this heterogeneous conglomerate of ideas,
presumptuously called themselves "Young Germany," or "the Modern
School." They have since repented their youthful sins, but not
improved their style of writing.

Lastly, German philosophy, that most complicated, but at the same time
most sure thermometer of the development of the German mind, had
declared for the middle class, when Hegel in his "Philosophy of Law"
pronounced Constitutional Monarchy to be the final and most perfect
form of government. In other words, he proclaimed the approaching
advent of the middle classes of the country to political power. His
school, after his death, did not stop here. While the more advanced
section of his followers, on one hand, subjected every religious
belief to the ordeal of a rigorous criticism, and shook to its
foundation the ancient fabric of Christianity, they at the same time
brought forward bolder political principles than hitherto it had been
the fate of German ears to hear expounded, and attempted to restore to
glory the memory of the heroes of the first French Revolution. The
abstruse philosophical language in which these ideas were clothed, if
it obscured the mind of both the writer and the reader, equally
blinded the eyes of the censor, and thus it was that the "young
Hegelian" writers enjoyed a liberty of the Press unknown in every
other branch of literature.

Thus it was evident that public opinion was undergoing a great change
in Germany. By degrees the vast majority of those classes whose
education or position in life enabled them, under an Absolute
Monarchy, to gain some political information, and to form anything
like an independent political opinion, united into one mighty phalanx
of opposition against the existing system. And in passing judgment
upon the slowness of political development in Germany no one ought to
omit taking into account the difficulty of obtaining correct
information upon any subject in a country where all sources of
information were under the control of the Government, where from the
Ragged School and the Sunday School to the Newspaper and University
nothing was said, taught, printed, or published but what had
previously obtained its approbation. Look at Vienna, for instance. The
people of Vienna, in industry and manufactures, second to none perhaps
in Germany; in spirit, courage, and revolutionary energy, proving
themselves far superior to all, were yet more ignorant as to their
real interests, and committed more blunders during the Revolution than
any others, and this was due in a very great measure to the almost
absolute ignorance with regard to the very commonest political
subjects in which Metternich's Government had succeeded in keeping
them.

It needs no further explanation why, under such a system, political
information was an almost exclusive monopoly of such classes of
society as could afford to pay for its being smuggled into the
country, and more particularly of those whose interests were most
seriously attacked by the existing state of things, namely, the
manufacturing and commercial classes. They, therefore, were the first
to unite in a mass against the continuance of a more or less disguised
Absolutism, and from their passing into the ranks of the opposition
must be dated the beginning of the real revolutionary movement in
Germany.

The oppositional pronunciamento of the German bourgeoisie may be dated
from 1840, from the death of the late King of Prussia, the last
surviving founder of the Holy Alliance of 1815. The new King was known
to be no supporter of the predominantly bureaucratic and military
monarchy of his father. What the French middle class had expected
from the advent of Louis XVI., the German bourgeoisie hoped, in some
measure, from Frederick William IV. of Prussia. It was agreed upon all
hands that the old system was exploded, worn-out, and must be given
up; and what had been borne in silence under the old King now was
loudly proclaimed to be intolerable.

But if Louis XVI., "Louis le Désiré," had been a plain, unpretending
simpleton, half conscious of his own nullity, without any fixed
opinions, ruled principally by the habits contracted during his
education, "Frederick William le Désiré" was something quite
different. While he certainly surpassed his French original in
weakness of character, he was neither without pretensions nor without
opinions. He had made himself acquainted, in an amateur sort of way,
with the rudiments of most sciences, and thought himself, therefore,
learned enough to consider final his judgment upon every subject. He
made sure he was a first-rate orator, and there was certainly no
commercial traveller in Berlin who could beat him either in prolixity
of pretended wit, or in fluency of elocution. And, above all, he had
his opinions. He hated and despised the bureaucratic element of the
Prussian Monarchy, but only because all his sympathies were with the
feudal element. Himself one of the founders of, and chief contributors
to, the _Berlin Political Weekly Paper_, the so-called Historical
School (a school living upon the ideas of Bonald, De Maistre, and
other writers of the first generation of French Legitimists), he
aimed at a restoration, as complete as possible, of the predominant
social position of the nobility. The King, first nobleman of his
realm, surrounded in the first instance by a splendid court of mighty
vassals, princes, dukes, and counts; in the second instance, by a
numerous and wealthy lower nobility; ruling according to his
discretion over his loyal burgesses and peasants, and thus being
himself the chief of a complete hierarchy of social ranks or castes,
each of which was to enjoy its particular privileges, and to be
separated from the others by the almost insurmountable barrier of
birth, or of a fixed, inalterable social position; the whole of these
castes, or "estates of the realm" balancing each other at the same
time so nicely in power and influence that a complete independence of
action should remain to the King--such was the _beau idéal_ which
Frederick William IV. undertook to realize, and which he is again
trying to realize at the present moment.

It took some time before the Prussian bourgeoisie, not very well
versed in theoretical questions, found out the real purport of their
King's tendency. But what they very soon found out was the fact that
he was bent upon things quite the reverse of what they wanted. Hardly
did the new King find his "gift of the gab" unfettered by his father's
death than he set about proclaiming his intentions in speeches without
number; and every speech, every act of his, went far to estrange from
him the sympathies of the middle class. He would not have cared much
for that, if it had not been for some stern and startling realities
which interrupted his poetic dreams. Alas, that romanticism is not
very quick at accounts, and that feudalism, ever since Don Quixote,
reckons without its host! Frederick William IV. partook too much of
that contempt of ready cash which ever has been the noblest
inheritance of the sons of the Crusaders. He found at his accession a
costly, although parsimoniously arranged system of government, and a
moderately filled State Treasury. In two years every trace of a
surplus was spent in court festivals, royal progresses, largesses,
subventions to needy, seedy, and greedy noblemen, etc., and the
regular taxes were no longer sufficient for the exigencies of either
Court or Government. And thus His Majesty found himself very soon
placed between a glaring deficit on one side, and a law of 1820 on the
other, by which any new loan, or any increase of the then existing
taxation was made illegal without the assent of "the future
Representation of the People." This representation did not exist; the
new King was less inclined than even his father to create it; and if
he had been, he knew that public opinion had wonderfully changed since
his accession.

Indeed, the middle classes, who had partly expected that the new King
would at once grant a Constitution, proclaim the Liberty of the Press,
Trial by Jury, etc., etc.--in short, himself take the lead of that
peaceful revolution which they wanted in order to obtain political
supremacy--the middle classes had found out their error, and had
turned ferociously against the King. In the Rhine Provinces, and more
or less generally all over Prussia, they were so exasperated that
they, being short themselves of men able to represent them in the
Press, went to the length of an alliance with the extreme
philosophical party, of which we have spoken above. The fruit of this
alliance was the _Rhenish Gazette_ of Cologne,[6] a paper which was
suppressed after fifteen months' existence, but from which may be
dated the existence of the Newspaper Press in Germany. This was in
1842.

The poor King, whose commercial difficulties were the keenest satire
upon his Mediæval propensities, very soon found out that he could not
continue to reign without making some slight concession to the popular
outcry for that "Representation of the People," which, as the last
remnant of the long-forgotten promises of 1813 and 1815, had been
embodied in the law of 1820. He found the least objectionable mode of
satisfying this untoward law in calling together the Standing
Committees of the Provincial Diets. The Provincial Diets had been
instituted in 1823. They consisted for every one of the eight
provinces of the kingdom:--(1) Of the higher nobility, the formerly
sovereign families of the German Empire, the heads of which were
members of the Diet by birthright. (2) Of the representatives of the
knights, or lower nobility. (3) Of representatives of towns. (4) Of
deputies of the peasantry, or small farming class. The whole was
arranged in such a manner that in every province the two sections of
the nobility always had a majority of the Diet. Every one of these
eight Provincial Diets elected a Committee, and these eight Committees
were now called to Berlin in order to form a Representative Assembly
for the purpose of voting the much-desired loan. It was stated that
the Treasury was full, and that the loan was required, not for current
wants, but for the construction of a State railway. But the united
Committees gave the King a flat refusal, declaring themselves
incompetent to act as the representatives of the people, and called
upon His Majesty to fulfil the promise of a Representative
Constitution which his father had given, when he wanted the aid of the
people against Napoleon.

The sitting of the united Committees proved that the spirit of
opposition was no longer confined to the bourgeoisie. A part of the
peasantry had joined them, and many nobles, being themselves large
farmers on their own properties, and dealers in corn, wool, spirits,
and flax, requiring the same guarantees against absolutism,
bureaucracy, and feudal restoration, had equally pronounced against
the Government, and for a Representative Constitution. The King's plan
had signally failed; he had got no money, and had increased the power
of the opposition. The subsequent sitting of the Provincial Diets
themselves was still more unfortunate for the King. All of them asked
for reforms, for the fulfilment of the promises of 1813 and 1815, for
a Constitution and a Free Press; the resolutions to this effect of
some of them were rather disrespectfully worded, and the ill-humored
replies of the exasperated King made the evil still greater.

In the meantime, the financial difficulties of the Government went on
increasing. For a time, abatements made upon the moneys appropriated
for the different public services, fraudulent transactions with the
"Seehandlung," a commercial establishment speculating and trading for
account and risk of the State, and long since acting as its
money-broker, had sufficed to keep up appearances; increased issues of
State paper-money had furnished some resources; and the secret, upon
the whole, had been pretty well kept. But all these contrivances were
soon exhausted. There was another plan tried: the establishment of a
bank, the capital of which was to be furnished partly by the State and
partly by private shareholders; the chief direction to belong to the
State, in such a manner as to enable the Government to draw upon the
funds of this bank to a large amount, and thus to repeat the same
fraudulent transactions that would no longer do with the
"Seehandlung." But, as a matter of course, there were no capitalists
to be found who would hand over their money upon such conditions; the
statutes of the bank had to be altered, and the property of the
shareholders guaranteed from the encroachments of the Treasury, before
any shares were subscribed for. Thus, this plan having failed, there
remained nothing but to try a loan, if capitalists could be found who
would lend their cash without requiring the permission and guarantee
of that mysterious "future Representation of the People." Rothschild
was applied to, and he declared that if the loan was to be guaranteed
by this "Representation of the People," he would undertake the thing
at a moment's notice--if not, he could not have anything to do with
the transaction.

Thus every hope of obtaining money had vanished, and there was no
possibility of escaping the fatal "Representation of the People."
Rothschild's refusal was known in autumn, 1846, and in February of the
next year the King called together all the eight Provincial Diets to
Berlin, forming them into one "United Diet." This Diet was to do the
work required, in case of need, by the law of 1820; it was to vote
loans and increased taxes, but beyond that it was to have no rights.
Its voice upon general legislation was to be merely consultative; it
was to assemble, not at fixed periods, but whenever it pleased the
King; it was to discuss nothing but what the Government pleased to
lay before it. Of course, the members were very little satisfied with
the part they were expected to perform. They repeated the wishes they
had enounced when they met in the provincial assembles; the relations
between them and the Government soon became acrimonious, and when the
loan, which was again stated to be required for railway constructions,
was demanded from them, they again refused to grant it.

This vote very soon brought their sitting to a close. The King, more
and more exasperated, dismissed them with a reprimand, but still
remained without money. And, indeed, he had every reason to be alarmed
at his position, seeing that the Liberal League, headed by the middle
classes, comprising a large part of the lower nobility, and all the
different sections of the lower orders--that this Liberal League was
determined to have what it wanted. In vain the King had declared, in
the opening speech, that he would never, never grant a Constitution in
the modern sense of the word; the Liberal League insisted upon such a
modern, anti-feudal, Representative Constitution, with all its
sequels, Liberty of the Press, Trial by Jury, etc.; and before they
got it, not a farthing of money would they grant. There was one thing
evident: that things could not go on long in this manner, and that
either one of the parties must give way, or that a rupture--a bloody
struggle--must ensue. And the middle classes knew that they were on
the eve of a revolution, and they prepared themselves for it. They
sought to obtain by every possible means the support of the working
class of the towns, and of the peasantry in the agricultural
districts, and it is well known that there was, in the latter end of
1847, hardly a single prominent political character among the
bourgeoisie who did not proclaim himself a "Socialist," in order to
insure to himself the sympathy of the proletarian class. We shall see
these "Socialists" at work by and by.

This eagerness of the leading bourgeoisie to adopt, at least the
outward show of Socialism, was caused by a great change that had come
over the working classes of Germany. There had been ever since 1840 a
fraction of German workmen, who, travelling in France and Switzerland,
had more or less imbibed the crude Socialist or Communist notions then
current among the French workmen. The increasing attention paid to
similar ideas in France ever since 1840 made Socialism and Communism
fashionable in Germany also, and as far back as 1843, all newspapers
teemed with discussions of social questions. A school of Socialists
very soon formed itself in Germany, distinguished more for the
obscurity than for the novelty of its ideas; its principal efforts
consisted in the translation of French Fourierist, Saint-Simonian, and
other doctrines into the abstruse language of German philosophy. The
German Communist school, entirely different from this sect, was formed
about the same time.

In 1844, there occurred the Silesian weavers' riots, followed by the
insurrection of the calico printers of Prague. These riots, cruelly
suppressed, riots of working men not against the Government, but
against their employers, created a deep sensation, and gave a new
stimulus to Socialist and Communist propaganda amongst the working
people. So did the bread riots during the year of famine, 1847. In
short, in the same manner as Constitutional Opposition rallied around
its banner the great bulk of the propertied classes (with the
exception of the large feudal land-holders), so the working classes of
the larger towns looked for their emancipation to the Socialist and
Communist doctrines, although, under the then existing Press laws,
they could be made to know only very little about them. They could not
be expected to have any very definite ideas as to what they wanted;
they only knew that the programme of the Constitutional bourgeoisie
did not contain all they wanted, and that their wants were no wise
contained in the Constitutional circle of ideas.

There was then no separate Republican party in Germany. People were
either Constitutional Monarchists, or more or less clearly defined
Socialists or Communists.

With such elements the slightest collision must have brought about a
great revolution. While the higher nobility and the older civil and
military officers were the only safe supports of the existing system;
while the lower nobility, the trading middle classes, the
universities, the school-masters of every degree, and even part of
the lower ranks of the bureaucracy and military officers were all
leagued against the Government; while behind these there stood the
dissatisfied masses of the peasantry, and of the proletarians of the
large towns, supporting, for the time being, the Liberal Opposition,
but already muttering strange words about taking things into their own
hands; while the bourgeoisie was ready to hurl down the Government,
and the proletarians were preparing to hurl down the bourgeoisie in
its turn; this Government went on obstinately in a course which must
bring about a collision. Germany was, in the beginning of 1848, on the
eve of a revolution, and this revolution was sure to come, even had
the French Revolution of February not hastened it.

What the effects of this Parisian Revolution were upon Germany we
shall see in our next.

LONDON, September, 1851.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] "The Rhenish Gazette." This paper was published at Cologne, as the
organ of the Liberal leaders, Hansemann and Camphausen. Marx
contributed certain articles on the Landtag, which created so great a
sensation that he was offered in 1842--although only 24 years of
age--the editorship of the paper. He accepted the offer, and then
began his long fight with the Prussian Government. Of course the paper
was published under the supervision of a censor, but he, good, easy
man, was hopelessly outwitted by the young firebrand. So the
Government sent a second "special" censor from Berlin, but the double
censorship proved unequal to the task, and in 1843 the paper was
suppressed.




III.

THE OTHER GERMAN STATES.


                                          NOVEMBER 6th, 1851.

In our last we confined ourselves almost exclusively to that State
which, during the years 1840 to 1848, was by far the most important in
the German movement, namely, to Prussia. It is, however, time to pass
a rapid glance over the other States of Germany during the same
period.

As to the petty States, they had, ever since the revolutionary
movements of 1830, completely passed under the dictatorship of the
Diet, that is of Austria and Prussia. The several Constitutions,
established as much as a means of defence against the dictates of the
larger States, as to insure popularity to their princely authors, and
unity to heterogeneous Assemblies of Provinces, formed by the Congress
of Vienna, without any leading principle whatever--these
Constitutions, illusory as they were, had yet proved dangerous to the
authority of the petty princes themselves during the exciting times of
1830 and 1831. They were all but destroyed; whatever of them was
allowed to remain was less than a shadow, and it required the
loquacious self-complacency of a Welcker, a Rotteck, a Dahlmann, to
imagine that any results could possibly flow from the humble
opposition, mingled with degrading flattery, which they were allowed
to show off in the impotent Chambers of these petty States.

The more energetic portion of the middle class in these smaller
States, very soon after 1840, abandoned all the hopes they had
formerly based upon the development of Parliamentary government in
these dependencies of Austria and Prussia. No sooner had the Prussian
bourgeoisie and the classes allied to it shown a serious resolution to
struggle for Parliamentary government in Prussia, than they were
allowed to take the lead of the Constitutional movement over all
non-Austrian Germany. It is a fact which now will not any longer be
contested, that the nucleus of those Constitutionalists of Central
Germany, who afterwards seceded from the Frankfort National Assembly,
and who, from the place of their separate meetings, were called the
Gotha party, long before 1848 contemplated a plan which, with little
modification, they in 1849 proposed to the representatives of all
Germany. They intended a complete exclusion of Austria from the German
Confederation, the establishment of a new Confederation, with a new
fundamental law, and with a Federal Parliament, of the more
insignificant States into the larger ones. All this was to be carried
out the moment Prussia entered into the ranks of Constitutional
Monarchy, established the Liberty of the Press, assumed a policy
independent from that of Russia and Austria, and thus enabled the
Constitutionalists of the lesser States to obtain a real control over
their respective Governments. The inventor of this scheme was
Professor Gervinus, of Heidelberg (Baden). Thus the emancipation of
the Prussian bourgeoisie was to be the signal for that of the middle
classes of Germany generally, and for an alliance, offensive and
defensive of both against Russia and Austria, for Austria was, as we
shall see presently, considered as an entirely barbarian country, of
which very little was known, and that little not to the credit of its
population; Austria, therefore, was not considered as an essential
part of Germany.

As to the other classes of society, in the smaller States they
followed, more or less rapidly, in the wake of their equals in
Prussia. The shopkeeping class got more and more dissatisfied with
their respective Governments, with the increase of taxation, with the
curtailments of those political sham-privileges of which they used to
boast when comparing themselves to the "slaves of despotism" in
Austria and Prussia; but as yet they had nothing definite in their
opposition which might stamp them as an independent party, distinct
from the Constitutionalism of the higher bourgeoisie. The
dissatisfaction among the peasantry was equally growing, but it is
well known that this section of the people, in quiet and peaceful
times, will never assert its interests and assume its position as an
independent class, except in countries where universal suffrage is
established. The working classes in the trades and manufactures of
the towns commenced to be infected with the "poison" of Socialism and
Communism, but there being few towns of any importance out of Prussia,
and still fewer manufacturing districts, the movement of this class,
owing to the want of centres of action and propaganda, was extremely
slow in the smaller States.

Both in Prussia and in the smaller States the difficulty of giving vent
to political opposition created a sort of religious opposition in the
parallel movements of German Catholicism and Free Congregationalism.
History affords us numerous examples where, in countries which enjoy
the blessings of a State Church, and where political discussion is
fettered, the profane and dangerous opposition against the worldly
power is hid under the more sanctified and apparently more
disinterested struggle against spiritual despotism. Many a Government
that will not allow of any of its acts being discussed, will hesitate
before it creates martyrs and excites the religious fanaticism of the
masses. Thus in Germany, in 1845, in every State, either the Roman
Catholic or the Protestant religion, or both, were considered part and
parcel of the law of the land. In every State, too, the clergy of
either of those denominations, or of both, formed an essential part of
the bureaucratic establishment of the Government. To attack Protestant
or Catholic orthodoxy, to attack priestcraft, was then to make an
underhand attack upon the Government itself. As to the German
Catholics, their very existence was an attack upon the Catholic
Governments of Germany, particularly Austria and Bavaria; and as such
it was taken by those Governments. The Free Congregationalists,
Protestant Dissenters, somewhat resembling the English and American
Unitarians, openly professed their opposition to the clerical and
rigidly orthodox tendency of the King of Prussia and his favourite
Minister for the Educational and Clerical Department, Mr. Eickhorn.
The two new sects, rapidly extending for a moment, the first in
Catholic, the second in Protestant countries, had no other distinction
but their different origin; as to their tenets, they perfectly agreed
upon this most important point--that all definite dogmas were
nugatory. This want of any definition was their very essence; they
pretended to build that great temple under the roof of which all
Germans might unite; they thus represented, in a religious form,
another political idea of the day--that of German unity, and yet they
could never agree among themselves.

The idea of German unity, which the above-mentioned sects sought to
realize, at least, upon religious ground, by inventing a common
religion for all Germans, manufactured expressly for their use,
habits, and taste--this idea was, indeed, very widely spread,
particularly in the smaller States. Ever since the dissolution of the
German Empire by Napoleon, the cry for a union of all the _disjecta
membra_ of the German body had been the most general expression of
discontent with the established order of things, and most so in the
smaller States, where costliness of a court, an administration, an
army, in short, the dead weight of taxation, increased in a direct
ratio with the smallness and impotency of the State. But what this
German unity was to be when carried out was a question upon which
parties disagreed. The bourgeoisie, which wanted no serious
revolutionary convulsion, were satisfied with what we have seen they
considered "practicable," namely a union of all Germany, exclusive of
Austria, under the supremacy of a Constitutional Government of
Prussia; and surely, without conjuring dangerous storms, nothing more
could, at that time, be done. The shopkeeping class and the peasantry,
as far as these latter troubled themselves about such things, never
arrived at any definition of that German unity they so loudly
clamoured after; a few dreamers, mostly feudalist reactionists, hoped
for the re-establishment of the German Empire; some few ignorant,
_soi-disant_ Radicals, admiring Swiss institutions, of which they had
not yet made that practical experience which afterwards most
ludicrously undeceived them, pronounced for a Federated Republic; and
it was only the most extreme party which, at that time, dared
pronounce for a German Republic, one and indivisible. Thus, German
unity was in itself a question big with disunion, discord, and, in the
case of certain eventualities, even civil war.

To resume, then; this was the state of Prussia, and the smaller States
of Germany, at the end of 1847. The middle class, feeling their
power, and resolved not to endure much longer the fetters with which
a feudal and bureaucratic despotism enchained their commercial
transactions, their industrial productivity, their common action as a
class; a portion of the landed nobility so far changed into producers
of mere marketable commodities, as to have the same interests and to
make common cause with the middle class; the smaller trading class,
dissatisfied, grumbling at the taxes, at the impediments thrown in the
way of their business, but without any definite plan for such reforms
as should secure their position in the social and political body; the
peasantry, oppressed here by feudal exactions, there by money-lenders,
usurers, and lawyers; the working people of the towns infected with
the general discontent, equally hating the Government and the large
industrial capitalists, and catching the contagion of Socialist and
Communist ideas; in short, a heterogeneous mass of opposition,
springing from various interests, but more or less led on by the
bourgeoisie, in the first ranks of which again marched the bourgeoisie
of Prussia, and particularly of the Rhine Province. On the other hand,
Governments disagreeing upon many points, distrustful of each other,
and particularly of that of Prussia, upon which yet they had to rely
for protection; in Prussia a Government forsaken by public opinion,
forsaken by even a portion of the nobility, leaning upon an army and a
bureaucracy which every day got more infected by the ideas, and
subjected to the influence, of the oppositional bourgeoisie--a
Government, besides all this, penniless in the most literal meaning of
the word, and which could not procure a single cent to cover its
increasing deficit, but by surrendering at discretion to the
opposition of the bourgeoisie. Was there ever a more splendid position
for the middle class of any country, while it struggled for power
against the established Government?

LONDON, September, 1851.




IV.

AUSTRIA.


                                          NOVEMBER 7th, 1851.

We have now to consider Austria; that country which, up to March,
1848, was sealed up to the eyes of foreign nations almost as much as
China before the late war with England.

As a matter of course, we can here take into consideration nothing but
German Austria. The affairs of the Polish, Hungarian, or Italian
Austrians do not belong to our subject, and as far as they, since
1848, have influenced the fate of the German Austrians, they will have
to be taken into account hereafter.

The Government of Prince Metternich turned upon two hinges; firstly,
to keep every one of the different nations subjected to the Austrian
rule, in check, by all other nations similarly conditioned; secondly,
and this always has been the fundamental principle of absolute
monarchies, to rely for support upon two classes, the feudal landlords
and the large stock-jobbing capitalists; and to balance, at the same
time, the influence and power of either of these classes by that of
the other, so as to leave full independence of action to the
Government. The landed nobility, whose entire income consisted in
feudal revenues of all sorts, could not but support a Government which
proved their only protection against that down-trodden class of serfs
upon whose spoils they lived; and whenever the less wealthy portion of
them, as in Galicia, in 1846, rose in opposition against the
Government, Metternich in an instant let loose upon them these very
serfs, who at any rate profited by the occasion to wreak a terrible
vengeance upon their more immediate oppressors. On the other hand, the
large capitalists of the Exchange were chained to Metternich's
Government by the vast share they had in the public funds of the
country. Austria, restored to her full power in 1815 restoring and
maintaining in Italy Absolute Monarchy ever since 1820, freed from
part of her liabilities by the bankruptcy of 1810, had, after the
peace, very soon re-established her credit in the great European money
markets; and in proportion as her credit grew, she had drawn against
it. Thus all the large European money-dealers had engaged considerable
portions of their capital in the Austrian funds; they all of them were
interested in upholding the credit of that country, and as Austrian
public credit, in order to be upheld, ever required new loans, they
were obliged from time to time to advance new capital in order to keep
up the credit of the securities for that which they already had
advanced. The long peace after 1815, and the apparent impossibility of
a thousand years old empire, like Austria, being upset, increased the
credit of Metternich's Government in a wonderful ratio, and made it
even independent of the good will of the Vienna bankers and
stock-jobbers; for as long as Metternich could obtain plenty of money
at Frankfort and Amsterdam, he had, of course, the satisfaction of
seeing the Austrian capitalists at his feet. They were, besides, in
every other respect at his mercy; the large profits which bankers,
stock-jobbers, and Government contractors always contrive to draw out
of an absolute monarchy, were compensated for by the almost unlimited
power which the Government possessed over their persons and fortunes;
and not the smallest shadow of an opposition was, therefore, to be
expected from this quarter. Thus Metternich was sure of the support of
the two most powerful and influential classes of the empire, and he
possessed besides an army and a bureaucracy, which for all purposes of
absolutism could not be better constituted. The civil and military
officers in the Austrian service form a race of their own; their
fathers have been in the service of the Kaiser, and so will their sons
be; they belong to none of the multifarious nationalities congregated
under the wing of the double-headed eagle; they are, and ever have
been, removed from one end of the empire to the other, from Poland to
Italy, from Germany to Transylvania; Hungarian, Pole, German,
Roumanian, Italian, Croat, every individual not stamped with "imperial
and royal authority," etc., bearing a separate national character, is
equally despised by them; they have no nationality, or rather, they
alone make up the really Austrian nation. It is evident what a
pliable, and at the same time powerful instrument, in the hands of an
intelligent and energetic chief, such a civil and military hierarchy
must be.

As to the other classes of the population, Metternich, in the true
spirit of a statesman of the _ancien régime_, cared little for their
support. He had, with regard to them, but one policy: to draw as much
as possible out of them in the shape of taxation, and at the same
time, to keep them quiet. The trading and manufacturing middle class
was but of slow growth in Austria. The trade of the Danube was
comparatively unimportant; the country possessed but one port,
Trieste, and the trade of the port was very limited. As to the
manufacturers, they enjoyed considerable protection, amounting even in
most cases to the complete exclusion of all foreign competition; but
this advantage had been granted to them principally with a view to
increase their tax-paying capabilities, and was in a high degree
counterpoised by internal restrictions on manufactures, privileges on
guilds, and other feudal corporations, which were scrupulously upheld
as long as they did not impede the purposes and views of the
Government. The petty tradesmen were encased in the narrow bounds of
these Mediæval guilds, which kept the different trades in a perpetual
war of privilege against each other, and at the same time, by all but
excluding individuals of the working class from the possibility of
raising themselves in the social scale, gave a sort of hereditary
stability to the members of those involuntary associations. Lastly,
the peasant and the working man were treated as mere taxable matter,
and the only care that was taken of them was to keep them as much as
possible in the same conditions of life in which they then existed,
and in which their fathers had existed before them. For this purpose
every old, established, hereditary authority was upheld in the same
manner as that of the State; the authority of the landlord over the
petty tenant farmer, that of the manufacturer over the operative, of
the small master over the journeyman and apprentice, of the father
over the son, was everywhere rigidly maintained by the Government, and
every branch of disobedience punished the same as a transgression of
the law, by that universal instrument of Austrian justice--the stick.

Finally, to wind up into one comprehensive system all these attempts
at creating an artificial stability, the intellectual food allowed to
the nation was selected with the minutest caution, and dealt out as
sparingly as possible. Education was everywhere in the hands of the
Catholic priesthood, whose chiefs, in the same manner as the large
feudal landowners, were deeply interested in the conservation of the
existing system. The universities were organized in a manner which
allowed them to produce nothing but special men, that might or might
not obtain great proficiency in sundry particular branches of
knowledge, but which, at all events, excluded that universal liberal
education which other universities are expected to impart. There was
absolutely no newspaper press, except in Hungary, and the Hungarian
papers were prohibited in all other parts of the monarchy. As to
general literature, its range had not widened for a century; it had
narrowed again after the death of Joseph II. And all around the
frontier, wherever the Austrian States touched upon a civilized
country, a cordon of literary censors was established in connection
with the cordon of customhouse officials, preventing any foreign book
or newspaper from passing into Austria before its contents had been
twice or three times thoroughly sifted, and found pure of even the
slightest contamination of the malignant spirit of the age.

For about thirty years after 1815 this system worked with wonderful
success. Austria remained almost unknown to Europe, and Europe was
quite as little known in Austria. The social state of every class of
the population, and of the population as a whole, appeared not to have
undergone the slightest change. Whatever rancour there might exist
from class to class--and the existence of this rancour was for
Metternich a principal condition of government, which he even fostered
by making the higher classes the instruments of all Government
exactions, and thus throwing the odium upon them--whatever hatred the
people might bear to the inferior officials of the State, there
existed, upon the whole, little or no dissatisfaction with the Central
Government. The Emperor was adored, and old Francis I. seemed to be
borne out by facts when, doubting of the durability of this system, he
complacently added: "And yet it will hold while I live, and
Metternich."

But there was a slow underground movement going on which baffled all
Metternich's efforts. The wealth and influence of the manufacturing
and trading middle class increased. The introduction of machinery
and steam-power in manufactures upset in Austria, as it had done
everywhere else, the old relations and vital conditions of whole
classes of society; it changed serfs into free men, small farmers
into manufacturing operatives; it undermined the old feudal
trades-corporations, and destroyed the means of existence of many of
them. The new commercial and manufacturing population came everywhere
into collision with the old feudal institutions. The middle classes,
more and more induced by their business to travel abroad, introduced
some mythical knowledge of the civilized countries situated beyond the
Imperial line of customs; the introduction of railways finally
accelerated both the industrial and intellectual movement. There was,
too, a dangerous part in the Austrian State establishment, _viz._, the
Hungarian feudal Constitution, with its parliamentary proceedings, and
its struggles of the impoverished and oppositional mass of the
nobility against the Government and its allies, the magnates.
Presburg, the seat of the Diet, was at the very gates of Vienna. All
the elements contributed to create among the middle classes of the
towns a spirit, not exactly of opposition, for opposition was as yet
impossible, but of discontent; a general wish for reforms, more of an
administrative than of a constitutional nature. And in the same manner
as in Prussia, a portion of the bureaucracy joined the bourgeoisie.
Among this hereditary caste of officials the traditions of Joseph II.
were not forgotten; the more educated functionaries of the Government,
who themselves sometimes meddled with imaginary possible reforms, by
far preferred the progressive and intellectual despotism of that
Emperor to the "paternal" despotism of Metternich. A portion of the
poorer nobility equally sided with the middle class, and as to the
lower classes of the population, who always had found plenty of
grounds to complain of their superiors, if not of the Government, they
in most cases could not but adhere to the reformatory wishes of the
bourgeoisie.

It was about this time, say 1843 or 1844, that a particular branch of
literature, agreeable to this change, was established in Germany. A
few Austrian writers, novelists, literary critics, bad poets, the
whole of them of very indifferent ability, but gifted with that
peculiar industrialism proper to the Jewish race, established
themselves in Leipsic and other German towns out of Austria, and
there, out of the reach of Metternich, published a number of books and
pamphlets on Austrian affairs. They and their publishers made "a
roaring trade" of it. All Germany was eager to become initiated into
the secrets of the policy of European China; and the Austrians
themselves, who obtained these publications by the wholesale
smuggling carried on upon the Bohemian frontier, were still more
curious. Of course, the secrets let out in these publications were of
no great importance, and the reform plans schemed out by their
well-wishing authors bore the stamp of an innocuousness almost
amounting to political virginity. A Constitution and a free press for
Austria were things considered unattainable; administrative reforms,
extension of the rights of the Provincial Diets, admission of foreign
books and newspapers, and a less severe censorship--the loyal and
humble desires of these good Austrians did hardly go any farther.

At all events the growing impossibility of preventing the literary
intercourse of Austria with the rest of Germany, and through Germany
with the rest of the world, contributed much toward the formation of
an anti-Governmental public opinion, and brought at least some little
political information within the reach of part of the Austrian
population. Thus, by the end of 1847, Austria was seized, although in
an inferior degree, by that political and politico-religious agitation
which then prevailed in all Germany; and if its progress in Austria
was more silent, it did, nevertheless, find revolutionary elements
enough to work upon. There was the peasant, serf, or feudal tenant,
ground down into the dust by lordly or Government exactions; then the
factory operative, forced by the stick of the policeman to work upon
any terms the manufacturer chose to grant; then the journeyman,
debarred by the corporative laws from any chance of gaining an
independence in his trade; then the merchant, stumbling at every step
in business over absurd regulations; then the manufacturer, in
uninterrupted conflict with trade-guilds, jealous of their privileges,
or with greedy and meddling officials; then the school-master, the
_savant_, the better educated functionary, vainly struggling against
an ignorant and presumptuous clergy, or a stupid and dictating
superior. In short, there was not a single class satisfied, for the
small concessions Government was obliged now and then to make were not
made at its own expense, for the treasury could not afford that, but
at the expense of the high aristocracy and clergy; and as to the great
bankers, and fundholders, the late events in Italy, the increasing
opposition of the Hungarian Diet, and the unwonted spirit of
discontent and cry for reform, manifesting themselves all over the
Empire, were not of a nature to strengthen their faith in the solidity
and solvency of the Austrian Empire.

Thus Austria, too, was marching slowly but surely toward a mighty
change, when, of a sudden, an event broke out in France, which at once
brought down the impending storm, and gave the lie to old Francis's
assertion, that the building would hold out both during his and
Metternich's lifetime.

LONDON, September, 1851.




V.

THE VIENNA INSURRECTION.


                                          NOVEMBER 12, 1851.

On the 24th of February, 1848, Louis Philippe was driven out of Paris,
and the French Republic was proclaimed. On the 13th of March
following, the people of Vienna broke the power of Prince Metternich,
and made him flee shamefully out of the country. On the 18th of March
the people of Berlin rose in arms, and, after an obstinate struggle of
eighteen hours, had the satisfaction of seeing the King surrender
himself into their hands. Simultaneous outbreaks of a more or less
violent nature, but all with the same success, occurred in the
capitals of the smaller States of Germany. The German people, if they
had not accomplished their first revolution, were at least fairly
launched into the revolutionary career.

As to the incidents of these various insurrections, we cannot enter
here into the details of them: what we have to explain is their
character, and the position which the different classes of the
population took up with regard to them.

The Revolution of Vienna may be said to have been made by an almost
unanimous population. The bourgeoisie (with the exception of the
bankers and stock-jobbers), the petty trading class, the working
people, one and all arose at once against a Government detested by
all, a Government so universally hated, that the small minority of
nobles and money lords which had supported it made itself invisible on
the very first attack. The middle classes had been kept in such a
degree of political ignorance by Metternich that to them the news from
Paris about the reign of Anarchy, Socialism, and terror, and about
impending struggles between the class of capitalists and the class of
laborers, proved quite unintelligible. They, in their political
innocence, either could attach no meaning to these news, or they
believed them to be fiendish inventions of Metternich, to frighten
them into obedience. They, besides, had never seen working men acting
as a class, or stand up for their own distinct class interests. They
had, from their past experience, no idea of the possibility of any
differences springing up between classes that now were so heartily
united in upsetting a Government hated by all. They saw the working
people agree with themselves upon all points: a Constitution, Trial by
Jury, Liberty of the Press, etc. Thus they were, in March, 1848, at
least, heart and soul with the movement, and the movement, on the
other hand, at once constituted them the (at least in theory)
predominant class of the State.

But it is the fate of all revolutions that this union of different
classes, which in some degree is always the necessary condition of
any revolution, cannot subsist long. No sooner is the victory gained
against the common enemy than the victors become divided among
themselves into different camps, and turn their weapons against each
other. It is this rapid and passionate development of class antagonism
which, in old and complicated social organisms, makes a revolution
such a powerful agent of social and political progress; it is this
incessantly quick upshooting of new parties succeeding each other in
power, which, during those violent commotions, makes a nation pass in
five years over more ground than it would have done in a century under
ordinary circumstances.

The Revolution in Vienna made the middle class the theoretically
predominant class; that is to say, the concessions wrung from the
Government were such as, once carried out practically and adhered to
for a time, would inevitably have secured the supremacy of the middle
class. But practically the supremacy of that class was far from being
established. It is true that by the establishment of a national guard,
which gave arms to the bourgeoisie and petty tradesmen, that class
obtained both force and importance; it is true that by the
installation of a "Committee of Safety," a sort of revolutionary,
irresponsible Government in which the bourgeoisie predominated, it was
placed at the head of power. But, at the same time, the working
classes were partially armed too; they and the students had borne the
brunt of the fight, as far as fight there had been; and the students,
about 4,000 strong, well-armed, and far better disciplined than the
national guard, formed the nucleus, the real strength of the
revolutionary force, and were no ways willing to act as a mere
instrument in the hands of the Committee of Safety. Though they
recognized it, and were even its most enthusiastic supporters, they
yet formed a sort of independent and rather turbulent body,
deliberating for themselves in the "Aula," keeping an intermediate
position between the bourgeoisie and the working-classes, preventing
by constant agitation things from settling down to the old every-day
tranquillity, and very often forcing their resolutions upon the
Committee of Safety. The working men, on the other hand, almost
entirely thrown out of employment, had to be employed in public works
at the expense of the State, and the money for this purpose had, of
course, to be taken out of the purse of the tax-payers or out of the
chest of the city of Vienna. All this could not but become very
unpleasant to the tradesmen of Vienna. The manufactures of the city,
calculated for the consumption of the rich and aristocratic courts of
a large country, were as a matter of course entirely stopped by the
Revolution, by the flight of the aristocracy and Court; trade was at a
standstill, and the continuous agitation and excitement kept up by the
students and working people was certainly not the means to "restore
confidence," as the phrase went. Thus a certain coolness very soon
sprung up between the middle classes on the one side and the
turbulent students and working people on the other; and if for a long
time this coolness was not ripened into open hostility, it was because
the Ministry, and particularly the Court, in their impatience to
restore the old order of things, constantly justified the suspicions
and the turbulent activity of the more revolutionary parties, and
constantly made arise, even before the eyes of the middle classes, the
spectre of old Metternichian despotism. Thus on the 15th of May, and
again on the 16th, there were fresh risings of all classes in Vienna,
on account of the Government having tried to attack, or to undermine
some of the newly-conquered liberties, and on each occasion the
alliance between the national guard or armed middle class, the
students, and the workingmen, was again cemented for a time.

As to the other classes of the population, the aristocracy and the
money lords had disappeared, and the peasantry were busily engaged
everywhere in removing, down to the very last vestiges of feudalism.
Thanks to the war in Italy, and the occupation which Vienna and
Hungary gave to the Court, they were left at full liberty, and
succeeded in their work of liberation, in Austria, better than in any
other part of Germany. The Austrian Diet had very shortly after only
to confirm the steps already practically taken by the peasantry, and
whatever else the Government of Prince Schwartzenberg may be enabled
to restore, it will never have the power of re-establishing the feudal
servitude of the peasantry. And if Austria at the present moment is
again comparatively tranquil, and even strong, it is principally
because the great majority of the people, the peasants, have been real
gainers by the Revolution, and because whatever else has been attacked
by the restored Government, those palpable, substantial advantages,
conquered by the peasantry, are as yet untouched.

LONDON, October, 1851.



VI.

THE BERLIN INSURRECTION.


                                          NOVEMBER 28, 1851.

The second center of revolutionary action was Berlin, and from what
has been stated in the foregoing papers, it may be guessed that there
this action was far from having that unanimous support of almost all
classes by which it was accompanied in Vienna. In Prussia, the
bourgeoisie had been already involved in actual struggles with the
Government; a rupture had been file result of the "United Diet"; a
bourgeois revolution was impending, and that revolution might have
been, in its first outbreak, quite as unanimous as that of Vienna, had
it not been for the Paris Revolution of February. That event
precipitated everything, while at the same time it was carried out
under a banner totally different from that under which the Prussian
bourgeoisie was preparing to defy its Government. The Revolution of
February upset, in France, the very same sort of Government which the
Prussian bourgeoisie were going to set up in their own country. The
Revolution of February announced itself as a revolution of the
working classes against the middle classes; it proclaimed the downfall
of middle-class government and the emancipation of the workingman. Now
the Prussian bourgeoisie had, of late, had quite enough of
working-class agitation in their own country. After the first terror
of the Silesian riots had passed away, they had even tried to give
this agitation a turn in their own favor; but they always had retained
a salutary horror of revolutionary Socialism and Communism; and,
therefore, when they saw men at the head of the Government in Paris
whom they considered as the most dangerous enemies of property, order,
religion, family, and of the other _Penates_ of the modern bourgeois,
they at once experienced a considerable cooling down of their own
revolutionary ardor. They knew that the moment must be seized, and
that, without the aid of the working masses, they would be defeated;
and yet their courage failed them. Thus they sided with the Government
in the first partial and provincial outbreaks, tried to keep the
people quiet in Berlin, who, during five days, met in crowds before
the royal palace to discuss the news and ask for changes in the
Government; and when at last, after the news of the downfall of
Metternich, the King made some slight concessions, the bourgeoisie
considered the Revolution as completed, and went to thank His Majesty
for having fulfilled all the wishes of his people. But then followed
the attack of the military on the crowd, the barricades, the struggle,
and the defeat of royalty. Then everything was changed; the very
working classes, which it had been the tendency of the bourgeoisie to
keep in the background, had been pushed forward, had fought and
conquered, and all at once were conscious of their strength.
Restrictions of suffrage, of the liberty of the press, of the right to
sit on juries, of the right of meeting--restrictions that would have
been very agreeable to the bourgeoisie because they would have touched
upon such classes only as were beneath them--now were no longer
possible. The danger of a repetition of the Parisian scenes of
"anarchy" was imminent. Before this danger all former differences
disappeared. Against the victorious workingman, although he had not
yet uttered any specific demands for himself, the friends and the foes
of many years united, and the alliance between the bourgeoisie and the
supporters of the over-turned system was concluded upon the very
barricades of Berlin. The necessary concessions, but no more than was
unavoidable, were to be made, a ministry of the opposition leaders of
the United Diet was to be formed, and in return for its services in
saving the Crown, it was to have the support of all the props of the
old Government, the feudal aristocracy, the bureaucracy, the army.
These were the conditions upon which Messrs. Camphausen and Hansemann
undertook the formation of a cabinet.

Such was the dread evinced by the new ministers of the aroused masses,
that in their eyes every means was good if it only tended to
strengthen the shaken foundations of authority. They, poor deluded
wretches, thought every danger of a restoration of the old system had
passed away; and thus they made use of the whole of the old State
machinery for the purpose of restoring "order." Not a single
bureaucrat or military officer was dismissed; not the slightest change
was made in the old bureaucratic system of administration. These
precious constitutional and responsible ministers even restored to
their posts those functionaries whom the people, in the first heat of
revolutionary ardor, had driven away on account of their former acts
of bureaucratic overbearing. There was nothing altered in Prussia but
the persons of the ministers; even the ministerial staffs in the
different departments were not touched upon, and all the
constitutional place-hunters, who had formed the chorus of the
newly-elevated rulers, and who had expected their share of power and
office, were told to wait until restored stability allowed changes to
be operated in the bureaucratic personnel which now were not without
danger.

The King, chap-fallen in the highest degree after the insurrection of
the 18th of March, very soon found out that he was quite as necessary
to these "liberal" ministers as they were to him. The throne had been
spared by the insurrection; the throne was the last existing obstacle
to "anarchy"; the liberal middle class and its leaders, now in the
ministry, had therefore every interest to keep on excellent terms with
the crown. The King, and the reactionary camerilla that surrounded
him, were not slow in discovering this, and profited by the
circumstance in order to fetter the march of the ministry even in
those petty reforms that were from time to time intended.

The first care of the ministry was to give a sort of legal appearance
to the recent violent changes. The United Diet was convoked in spite
of all popular opposition, in order to vote as the legal and
constitutional organ of the people a new electoral law for the
election of an Assembly, which was to agree with the crown upon a new
constitution. The elections were to be indirect, the mass of voters
electing a number of electors, who then were to choose the
representative. In spite of all opposition this system of double
elections passed. The United Diet was then asked for a loan of
twenty-five millions of dollars, opposed by the popular party, but
equally agreed to.

These acts of the ministry gave a most rapid development to the
popular, or as it now called itself, the Democratic party. This party,
headed by the petty trading and shopkeeping class, and uniting under
its banner, in the beginning of the revolution, the large majority of
the working people, demanded direct and universal suffrage, the same
as established in France, a single legislative assembly, and full and
open recognition of the revolution of the 18th of March, as the base
of the new governmental system. The more moderate faction would be
satisfied with a thus "democratized" monarchy, the more advanced
demanded the ultimate establishment of the republic. Both factions
agreed in recognizing the German National Assembly at Frankfort as
the supreme authority of the country, while the Constitutionalists and
Reactionists affected a great horror of the sovereignty of this body,
which they professed to consider as utterly revolutionary.

The independent movement of the working classes had, by the
revolution, been broken up for a time. The immediate wants and
circumstances of the movement were such as not to allow any of the
specific demands of the Proletarian party to be put in the foreground.
In fact, as long as the ground was not cleared for the independent
action of the working men, as long as direct and universal suffrage
was not yet established, as long as the thirty-six larger and smaller
states continued to cut up Germany into numberless morsels, what
else could the Proletarian party do but watch the--for them
all-important--movement of Paris, and struggle in common with the
petty shopkeepers for the attainment of those rights, which would
allow them to fight afterwards their own battle?

There were only three points, then, by which the Proletarian party in
its political action essentially distinguished itself from the petty
trading class, or properly so-called Democratic party; firstly, in
judging differently the French movement, with regard to which the
democrats attacked, and the Proletarian revolutionists defended, the
extreme party in Paris; secondly, in proclaiming the necessity of
establishing a German Republic, one and indivisible, while the very
extremest ultras among the democrats only dared to sigh for a
Federative Republic; and thirdly, in showing upon every occasion, that
revolutionary boldness and readiness for action, in which any party
headed by, and composed principally of petty tradesmen, will always be
deficient.

The Proletarian, or really Revolutionary party, succeeded only very
gradually in withdrawing the mass of the working people from the
influence of the Democrats, whose tail they formed in the beginning of
the Revolution. But in due time the indecision, weakness, and
cowardice of the Democratic leaders did the rest, and it may now be
said to be one of the principal results of the last years'
convulsions, that wherever the working-class is concentrated in
anything like considerable masses, they are entirely freed from that
Democratic influence which led them into an endless series of blunders
and misfortunes during 1848 and 1849. But we had better not
anticipate; the events of these two years will give us plenty of
opportunities to show the Democratic gentlemen at work.

The peasantry in Prussia, the same as in Austria, but with less
energy, feudalism pressing, upon the whole, not quite so hardly upon
them here, had profited by the revolution to free themselves at once
from all feudal shackles. But here, from the reasons stated before,
the middle classes at once turned against them, their oldest, their
most indispensable allies; the democrats, equally frightened with the
bourgeoisie, by what was called attacks upon private property, failed
equally to support them; and thus, after three months' emancipation,
after bloody struggles and military executions, particularly in
Silesia, feudalism was restored by the hands of the, until yesterday,
anti-feudal bourgeoisie. There is not a more damning fact to be
brought against them than this. Similar treason against its best
allies, against itself, never was committed by any party in history,
and whatever humiliation and chastisement may be in store for this
middle class party, it has deserved by this one act every morsel of
it.

OCTOBER, 1851.




VII.

THE FRANKFORT NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.


                                          FEBRUARY 27, 1852.

It will perhaps be in the recollection of our readers that in the six
preceding papers we followed up the revolutionary movement of Germany
to the two great popular victories of March 13th in Vienna, and March
18th in Berlin. We saw, both in Austria and Prussia, the establishment
of constitutional governments and the proclamation, as leading rules
for all future policy, of Liberal, or middle class principles; and the
only difference observable between the two great centers of action was
this, that in Prussia the liberal bourgeoisie, in the persons of two
wealthy merchants, Messrs. Camphausen and Hansemann, directly seized
upon the reins of power; while in Austria, where the bourgeoisie was,
politically, far less educated, the Liberal bureaucracy walked into
office, and professed to hold power in trust for them. We have further
seen, how the parties and classes of society, that were heretofore all
united in opposition to the old government, got divided among
themselves after the victory, or even during the struggle; and how
that same Liberal bourgeoisie that alone profited from the victory
turned round immediately upon its allies of yesterday, assumed a
hostile attitude against every class or party of a more advanced
character, and concluded an alliance with the conquered feudal and
bureaucratic interests. It was in fact, evident, even from the
beginning of the revolutionary drama, that the Liberal bourgeoisie
could not hold its ground against the vanquished, but not destroyed,
feudal and bureaucratic parties except by relying upon the assistance
of the popular and more advanced parties; and that it equally
required, against the torrent of these more advanced masses, the
assistance of the feudal nobility and of the bureaucracy. Thus, it was
clear enough that the bourgeoisie in Austria and Prussia did not
possess sufficient strength to maintain their power, and to adapt the
institutions of the country to their own wants and ideas. The Liberal
bourgeois ministry was only a halting-place from which, according to
the turn circumstances might take, the country would either have to go
on to the more advanced stage of Unitarian republicanism, or to
relapse into the old clerico-feudal and bureaucratic _régime_. At all
events, the real, decisive struggle was yet to come; the events of
March had only engaged the combat.

Austria and Prussia being the two ruling states of Germany, every
decisive revolutionary victory in Vienna or Berlin would have been
decisive for all Germany. And as far as they went, the events of
March, 1848, in these two cities, decided the turn of German affairs.
It would, then, be superfluous to recur to the movements that occurred
in the minor States; and we might, indeed, confine ourselves to the
consideration of Austrian and Prussian affairs exclusively, if the
existence of these minor states had not given rise to a body which
was, by its very existence, a most striking proof of the abnormal
situation of Germany and of the incompleteness of the late revolution;
a body so abnormal, so ludicrous by its very position, and yet so full
of its own importance, that history will, most likely, never afford a
pendant to it. This body was the so-called _German National Assembly_
at Frankfort-on-Main.

After the popular victories of Vienna and Berlin, it was a matter of
course that there should be a Representative Assembly for all Germany.
This body was consequently elected, and met at Frankfort, by the side
of the old Federative Diet. The German National Assembly was expected,
by the people, to settle every matter in dispute, and to act as the
highest legislative authority for the whole of the German
Confederation. But, at the same time, the Diet which had convoked it
had in no way fixed its attributions. No one knew whether its decrees
were to have force of law, or whether they were to be subject to the
sanction of the Diet, or of the individual Governments. In this
perplexity, if the Assembly had been possessed of the least energy, it
would have immediately dissolved and sent home the Diet--than which
no corporate body was more unpopular in Germany--and replaced it by a
Federal Government, chosen from among its own members. It would have
declared itself the only legal expression of the sovereign will of the
German people, and thus have attached legal validity to every one of
its decrees. It would, above all, have secured to itself an organized
and armed force in the country sufficient to put down any opposition
on the parts of the Governments. And all this was easy, very easy, at
that early period of the Revolution. But that would have been
expecting a great deal too much from an Assembly composed in its
majority of Liberal attorneys and _doctrinaire_ professors, an
Assembly which, while it pretended to embody the very essence of
German intellect and science, was in reality nothing but a stage where
old and worn-out political characters exhibited their involuntary
ludicrousness and their impotence of thought, as well as action,
before the eyes of all Germany. THIS Assembly of old women was, from
the first day of its existence, more frightened of the least popular
movement than of all the reactionary plots of all the German
Governments put together. It deliberated under the eyes of the Diet,
nay, it almost craved the Diet's sanction to its decrees, for its
first resolutions had to be promulgated by that odious body. Instead
of asserting its own sovereignty, it studiously avoided the discussion
of any such dangerous question. Instead of surrounding itself by a
popular force, it passed to the order of the day over all the violent
encroachments of the Governments; Mayence, under its very eyes, was
placed in a state of siege, and the people there disarmed, and the
National Assembly did not stir. Later on it elected Archduke John of
Austria Regent of Germany, and declared that all its resolutions were
to have the force of law; but then Archduke John was only instituted
in his new dignity after the consent of all the Governments had been
obtained, and he was instituted not by the Assembly, but by the Diet;
and as to the legal force of the decrees of the Assembly, that point
was never recognized by the larger Governments, nor enforced by the
Assembly itself; it therefore remained in suspense. Thus we had the
strange spectacle of an Assembly pretending to be the only legal
representative of a great and sovereign nation, and yet never
possessing either the will or the force to make its claims recognized.
The debates of this body, without any practical result, were not even
of any theoretical value, reproducing, as they did, nothing but the
most hackneyed commonplace themes of superannuated philosophical and
juridical schools; every sentence that was said, or rather stammered
forth, in that Assembly having been printed a thousand times over, and
a thousand times better, long before.

Thus the pretended new central authority of Germany left everything as
it had found it. So far from realizing the long-demanded unity of
Germany, it did not dispossess the most insignificant of the princes
who ruled her; it did not draw closer the bonds of union between her
separated provinces; it never moved a single step to break down the
customhouse barriers that separated Hanover from Prussia, and Prussia
from Austria; it did not even make the slightest attempt to remove the
obnoxious dues that everywhere obstruct river navigation in Prussia.
But the less this Assembly did the more it blustered. It created a
German fleet--upon paper; it annexed Poland and Schleswig; it allowed
German-Austria to carry on war against Italy, and yet prohibited the
Italians from following up the Austrians into their safe retreat in
Germany; it gave three cheers and one cheer more for the French
republic, and it received Hungarian embassies, which certainly went
home with far more confused ideas about Germany than they had come
with.

This Assembly had been, in the beginning of the Revolution, the
bugbear of all German Governments. They had counted upon a very
dictatorial and revolutionary action on its part--on account of the
very want of definiteness in which it had been found necessary to
leave its competency. These Governments, therefore, got up a most
comprehensive system of intrigues in order to weaken the influence of
this dreaded body; but they proved to have more luck than wits, for
this Assembly did the work of the Governments better than they
themselves could have done. The chief feature among these intrigues
was the convocation of local Legislative Assemblies, and in
consequence, not only the lesser States convoked their legislatures,
but Prussia and Austria also called constituent assemblies. In these,
as in the Frankfort House of Representatives, the Liberal middle
class, or its allies, liberal lawyers, and bureaucrats had the
majority, and the turn affairs took in each of them was nearly the
same. The only difference is this, that the German National Assembly
was the parliament of an imaginary country, as it had declined the
task of forming what nevertheless was its own first condition of
existence, viz. a United Germany; that it discussed the imaginary and
never-to-be-carried-out measures of an imaginary government of its own
creation, and that it passed imaginary resolutions for which nobody
cared; while in Austria and Prussia the constituent bodies were at
least real parliaments, upsetting and creating real ministries, and
forcing, for a time at least, their resolutions upon the princes with
whom they had to contend. They, too, were cowardly, and lacked
enlarged views of revolutionary resolutions; they, too, betrayed the
people, and restored power to the hands of feudal, bureaucratic, and
military despotism. But then they were at least obliged to discuss
practical questions of immediate interest, and to live upon earth with
other people, while the Frankfort humbugs were never happier than when
they could roam in "the airy realms of dream," _im Luftreich des
Traums_. Thus the proceedings of the Berlin and Vienna Constituents
form an important part of German revolutionary history, while the
lucubrations of the Frankfort collective tomfoolery merely interest
the collector of literary and antiquarian curiosities.

The people of Germany, deeply feeling the necessity of doing away with
the obnoxious territorial division that scattered and annihilated the
collective force of the nation, for some time expected to find, in the
Frankfort National Assembly at least, the beginning of a new era. But
the childish conduct of that set of wiseacres soon disenchanted the
national enthusiasm. The disgraceful proceedings occasioned by the
armistice of Malmoe (September, 1848,) made the popular indignation
burst out against a body which, it had been hoped, would give the
nation a fair field for action, and which, instead, carried away by
unequalled cowardice, only restored to their former solidity the
foundations upon which the present counter-revolutionary system is
built.

LONDON, January, 1852.




VIII.

POLES, TSCHECHS, AND GERMANS.


                                          MARCH 5th, 1852.

From what has been stated in the foregoing articles, it is already
evident that unless a fresh revolution was to follow that of March,
1848, things would inevitably return, in Germany, to what they were
before this event. But such is the complicated nature of the
historical theme upon which we are trying to throw some light, that
subsequent events cannot be clearly understood without taking into
account what may be called the foreign relations of the German
Revolution. And these foreign relations were of the same intricate
nature as the home affairs.

The whole of the eastern half of Germany, as far as the Elbe, Saale,
and Bohemian Forest, has, it is well known, been reconquered during
the last thousand years, from invaders of Slavonic origin. The greater
part of these territories have been Germanized, to the perfect
extinction of all Slavonic nationality and language, for several
centuries past; and if we except a few totally isolated remnants,
amounting in the aggregate to less than a hundred thousand souls
(Kassubians in Pomerania, Wends or Sorbians in Lusatia)[7], their
inhabitants are, to all intents and purposes, Germans. But the case is
different along the whole of the frontier of ancient Poland, and in
the countries of the Tschechian tongue, in Bohemia and Moravia. Here
the two nationalities are mixed up in every district, the towns being
generally more or less German, while the Slavonic element prevails in
the rural villages, where, however, it is also gradually disintegrated
and forced back by the steady advance of German influence.

The reason of this state of things is this: ever since the time of
Charlemagne, the Germans have directed their most constant and
persevering efforts to the conquest, colonization, or, at least,
civilization of the east of Europe. The conquest of the feudal
nobility between the Elbe and the Oder, and the feudal colonies of the
military orders of knights in Prussia and Livonia, only laid the
ground for a far more extensive and effective system of Germanization
by the trading and manufacturing middle classes, which in Germany, as
in the rest of Western Europe, rose into social and political
importance since the fifteenth century. The Slavonians, and
particularly the Western Slavonians (Poles and Tschechs), are
essentially an agricultural race; trade and manufactures never were in
great favor with them. The consequence was that, with the increase of
population and the origin of cities in these regions, the production
of all articles of manufacture fell into the hands of German
immigrants, and the exchange of these commodities against agricultural
produce became the exclusive monopoly of the Jews, who, if they belong
to any nationality, are in these countries certainly rather Germans
than Slavonians. This has been, though in a less degree, the case in
all the east of Europe. The handicraftsman, the small shopkeeper, the
petty manufacturer, is a German up to this day in Petersburg, Pesth,
Jassy, and even Constantinople; while the money-lender, the publican,
the hawker--a very important man in these thinly populated
countries--is very generally a Jew, whose native tongue is a horribly
corrupted German. The importance of the German element in the Slavonic
frontier localities, thus rising with the growth of towns, trade and
manufactures, was still increased when it was found necessary to
import almost every element of mental culture from Germany; after the
German merchant and handicraftsman, the German clergyman, the German
school-master, the German _savant_ came to establish himself upon
Slavonic soil. And lastly, the iron thread of conquering armies, or
the cautious, well-premeditated grasp of diplomacy, not only followed,
but many times went ahead of the slow but sure advance of
denationalization by social development. Thus, great parts of Western
Prussia and Posen have been Germanized since the first partition of
Poland, by sales and grants of public domains to German colonists, by
encouragements given to German capitalists for the establishment of
manufactories, etc., in those neighborhoods, and very often, too, by
excessively despotic measures against the Polish inhabitants of the
country.

In this manner the last seventy years had entirely changed the line of
demarcation between the German and Polish nationalities. The
Revolution of 1848 calling forth at once the claim of all oppressed
nations to an independent existence, and to the right of settling
their own affairs for themselves, it was quite natural that the Poles
should at once demand the restoration of their country within the
frontiers of the old Polish Republic before 1772. It is true, this
frontier, even at that time, had become obsolete, if taken as the
delimitation of German and Polish nationality; it had become more so
every year since by the progress of Germanization; but then, the
Germans had proclaimed such an enthusiasm for the restoration of
Poland, that they must expect to be asked, as a first proof of the
reality of their sympathies to give up _their_ share of the plunder.
On the other hand, should whole tracts of land, inhabited chiefly by
Germans, should large towns, entirely German, be given up to a people
that as yet had never given any proofs of its capability of
progressing beyond a state of feudalism based upon agricultural
serfdom? The question was intricate enough. The only possible solution
was in a war with Russia. The question of delimitation between the
different revolutionized nations would have been made a secondary one
to that of first establishing a safe frontier against the common
enemy. The Poles, by receiving extended territories in the east, would
have become more tractable and reasonable in the west; and Riga and
Milan would have been deemed, after all, quite as important to them as
Danzig and Elbing. Thus the advanced party in Germany, deeming a war
with Russia necessary to keep up the Continental movement, and
considering that the national re-establishment even of a part of
Poland would inevitably lead to such a war, supported the Poles; while
the reigning middle class partly clearly foresaw its downfall from any
national war against Russia, which would have called more active and
energetic men to the helm, and, therefore, with a feigned enthusiasm
for the extension of German nationality, they declared Prussian
Poland, the chief seat of Polish revolutionary agitation, to be part
and parcel of the German Empire that was to be. The promises given to
the Poles in the first days of excitement were shamefully broken.
Polish armaments got up with the sanction of the Government were
dispersed and massacred by Prussian artillery; and as soon as the
month of April, 1848, within six weeks of the Berlin Revolution, the
Polish movement was crushed, and the old national hostility revived
between Poles and Germans. This immense and incalculable service to
the Russian autocrat was performed by the Liberal merchant-ministers,
Camphausen and Hansemann. It must be added that this Polish campaign
was the first means of reorganizing and reassuring that same Prussian
army, which afterward turned out the Liberal party, and crushed the
movement which Messrs. Camphausen and Hansemann had taken such pains
to bring about. "Whereby they sinned, thereby are they punished." Such
has been the fate of all the upstarts of 1848 and 1849, from Ledru
Rolin to Changarnier, and from Camphausen down to Haynau.

The question of nationality gave rise to another struggle in Bohemia.
This country, inhabited by two millions of Germans, and three millions
of Slavonians of the Tschechian tongue, had great historical
recollections, almost all connected with the former supremacy of the
Tschechs. But then the force of this branch of the Slavonic family had
been broken ever since the wars of the Hussites in the fifteenth
century. The province speaking the Tschechian tongue was divided, one
part forming the kingdom of Bohemia, another the principality of
Moravia, a third the Carpathian hill-country of the Slovaks, being
part of Hungary. The Moravians and Slovaks had long since lost every
vestige of national feeling and vitality, although mostly preserving
their language. Bohemia was surrounded by thoroughly German countries
on three sides out of four. The German element had made great progress
on her own territory; even in the capital, in Prague, the two
nationalities were pretty equally matched; and everywhere capital,
trade, industry, and mental culture were in the hands of the Germans.
The chief champion of the Tschechian nationality, Professor Palacky,
is himself nothing but a learned German run mad, who even now cannot
speak the Tschechian language correctly and without foreign accent.
But as it often happens, dying Tschechian nationality, dying according
to every fact known in history for the last four hundred years, made
in 1848 a last effort to regain its former vitality--an effort whose
failure, independently of all revolutionary considerations, was to
prove that Bohemia could only exist, henceforth, as a portion of
Germany, although part of her inhabitants might yet, for some
centuries, continue to speak a non-German language.

LONDON, February, 1852.

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Lusiana, an ancient territory of Germany, north of Bohemia, to
which the whole of it originally belonged. Later it belonged to
Saxony, and still later, in 1815, was divided between Saxony (the
northern part) and Prussia (the southern).




IX.

PANSLAVISM--THE SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN WAR.


                                          MARCH 15th, 1852.

Bohemia and Croatia (another disjected member of the Slavonic family,
acted upon by the Hungarian, as Bohemia by the German) were the homes
of what is called on the European continent "Panslavism." Neither
Bohemia nor Croatia was strong enough to exist as a nation by herself.
Their respective nationalities, gradually undermined by the action of
historical causes that inevitably absorbs into a more energetic stock,
could only hope to be restored to anything like independence by an
alliance with other Slavonic nations. There were twenty-two millions
of Poles, forty-five millions of Russians, eight millions of Serbians
and Bulgarians; why not form a mighty confederation of the whole
eighty millions of Slavonians, and drive back or exterminate the
intruder upon the holy Slavonic soil, the Turk, the Hungarian, and
above all the hated, but indispensable _Niemetz_, the German? Thus in
the studies of a few Slavonian _dilettanti_ of historical science was
this ludicrous, this anti-historical movement got up, a movement which
intended nothing less than to subjugate the civilized West under the
barbarian East, the town under the country, trade, manufactures,
intelligence, under the primitive agriculture of Slavonian serfs. But
behind this ludicrous theory stood the terrible reality of the
_Russian Empire_; that empire which by every movement proclaims the
pretension of considering all Europe as the domain of the Slavonic
race, and especially of the only energetic part of this race, of the
Russians; that empire which, with two capitals such as St. Petersburg
and Moscow, has not yet found its centre of gravity, as long as the
"City of the Czar" (Constantinople, called in Russian Tzarigrad, the
Czar's city), considered by every Russian peasant as the true
metropolis of his religion and his nation, is not actually the
residence of its Emperor; that empire which, for the last one hundred
and fifty years, has never lost, but always gained territory by every
war it has commenced. And well known in Central Europe are the
intrigues by which Russian policy supported the new-fangled system of
Panslavism, a system than which none better could be invented to suit
its purposes. Thus, the Bohemian and Croatian Panslavists, some
intentionally, some without knowing it, worked in the direct interest
of Russia; they betrayed the revolutionary cause for the shadow of a
nationality which, in the best of cases, would have shared the fate of
the Polish nationality under Russian sway. It must, however, be said
for the honor of the Poles, that they never got to be seriously
entangled in these Panslavist traps, and if a few of the aristocracy
turned furious Panslavists, they knew that by Russian subjugation they
had less to lose than by a revolt of their own peasant serfs.

The Bohemians and Croatians called, then, a general Slavonic Congress
at Prague, for the preparation of the universal Slavonian Alliance.
This Congress would have proved a decided failure even without the
interference of the Austrian military. The several Slavonic languages
differ quite as much as the English, the German, and the Swedish, and
when the proceedings opened, there was no common Slavonic tongue by
which the speakers could make themselves understood. French was tried,
but was equally unintelligible to the majority, and the poor Slavonic
enthusiasts, whose only common feeling was a common hatred against the
Germans, were at last obliged to express themselves in the hated
German language, as the only one that was generally understood! But
just then another Slavonic Congress was assembling in Prague, in the
shape of Galician lancers, Croatian and Slovak grenadiers, and
Bohemian gunners and cuirassiers; and this real, armed Slavonic
Congress, under the command of Windischgrätz, in less than twenty-four
hours drove the founders of an imaginary Slavonian supremacy out of
the town, and dispersed them to the winds.

The Bohemian, Moravian, Dalmatian, and part of the Polish deputies
(the aristocracy) to the Austrian Constituent Diet, made in that
Assembly a systematic war upon the German element. The Germans, and
part of the Poles (the impoverished nobility), were in this Assembly
the chief supporters of revolutionary progress; the mass of the
Slavonic deputies, in opposing them, were not satisfied with thus
showing clearly the reactionary tendencies of their entire movement,
but they were degraded enough to tamper and conspire with the very
same Austrian Government which had dispersed their meeting at Prague.
They, too, were paid for this infamous conduct; after supporting the
Government during the insurrection of October, 1848, an event which
finally secured to them a majority in the Diet, this now almost
exclusively Slavonic Diet was dispersed by Austrian soldiers, the same
as the Prague Congress, and the Panslavists threatened with
imprisonment if they should stir again. And they have only obtained
this, that Slavonic nationality is now being everywhere undermined by
Austrian centralization, a result for which they may thank their own
fanaticism and blindness.

If the frontiers of Hungary and Germany had admitted of any doubt,
there would certainly have been another quarrel there. But,
fortunately, there was no pretext, and the interests of both nations
being intimately related, they struggled against the same enemies,
_viz._, the Austrian Government and the Panslavistic fanaticism. The
good understanding was not for a moment disturbed. But the Italian
Revolution entangled at least a part of Germany in an internecine
war, and it must be stated here, as a proof how far the Metternichian
system had succeeded in keeping back the development of the public
mind, that during the first six months of 1848, the same men that had
in Vienna mounted the barricades, went, full of enthusiasm, to join
the army that fought against the Italian patriots. This deplorable
confusion of ideas did not, however, last long.

Lastly, there was the war with Denmark about Schleswig and Holstein.
These countries, unquestionably German by nationality, language and
predilection, are also from military, naval and commercial grounds
necessary to Germany. Their inhabitants have, for the last three
years, struggled hard against Danish intrusion. The right of treaties,
besides, was for them. The Revolution of March brought them into open
collision with the Danes, and Germany supported them. But while in
Poland, in Italy, in Bohemia, and later on, in Hungary, military
operations were pushed with the utmost vigor, in this the only
popular, the only, at least partially, revolutionary war, a system of
resultless marches and counter-marches was adopted, and an
interference of foreign diplomacy was submitted to, which led, after
many an heroic engagement, to a most miserable end. The German
Government betrayed, during the war, the Schleswig-Holstein
revolutionary army on every occasion, and allowed it purposely to be
cut up, when dispersed or divided, by the Danes. The German corps of
volunteers were treated the same.

But while thus the German name earned nothing but hatred on every
side, the German Constitutional and Liberal Governments rubbed their
hands for joy. They had succeeded in crushing the Polish and the
Bohemian movements. They had everywhere revived the old national
animosities, which heretofore had prevented any common understanding
and action between the German, the Pole, the Italian. They had
accustomed the people to scenes of civil war and repression by the
military. The Prussian army had regained its confidence in Poland, the
Austrian army in Prague; and while the superabundant patriotism ("_die
Patriotische Ueberkraft_," as Heine has it) of revolutionary but
shortsighted youth was led in Schleswig and Lombardy, to be crushed by
the grape-shot of the enemy, the regular army, the real instrument of
action, both of Prussia and Austria, was placed in a position to
regain public favor by victories over the foreigner. But we repeat:
these armies, strengthened by the Liberals as a means of action
against the more advanced party, no sooner had recovered their
self-confidence and their discipline in some degree, than they turned
themselves against the Liberals, and restored to power the men of the
old system. When Radetzky, in his camp beyond the Adige, received the
first orders from the "responsible ministers" at Vienna, he exclaimed:
"Who are these ministers? They are not the Government of Austria!
Austria is now nowhere but in my camp; I and my army, we are Austria;
and when we shall have beaten the Italians we shall reconquer the
Empire for the Emperor!" And old Radetzky was right--but the imbecile
"responsible" ministers at Vienna heeded him not.

LONDON, February, 1852.




X.

THE PARIS RISING--THE FRANKFORT ASSEMBLY.


                                          MARCH 18th, 1852.

As early as the beginning of April, 1848, the revolutionary torrent
had found itself stemmed all over the Continent of Europe by the
league which those classes of society that had profited by the first
victory immediately formed with the vanquished. In France, the petty
trading class and the Republican faction of the bourgeoisie had
combined with the Monarchist bourgeoisie against the proletarians; in
Germany and Italy, the victorious bourgeoisie had eagerly courted the
support of the feudal nobility, the official bureaucracy, and the
army, against the mass of the people and the petty traders. Very soon
the united Conservative and Counter-Revolutionary parties again
regained the ascendant. In England, an untimely and ill-prepared
popular demonstration (April 10th) turned out a complete and decisive
defeat of the popular party. In France, two similar movements (16th
April and 15th May) were equally defeated. In Italy, King Bomba
regained his authority by a single stroke on the 15th May. In Germany,
the different new bourgeois Governments and their respective
constituent Assemblies consolidated themselves, and if the eventful
15th of May gave rise, in Vienna, to a popular victory, this was an
event of merely secondary importance, and may be considered the last
successful flash of popular energy. In Hungary the movement appeared
to turn into the quiet channel of perfect legality, and the Polish
movement, as we have seen in our last, was stifled in the bud by
Prussian bayonets. But as yet nothing was decided as to the eventual
turn which things would take, and every inch of ground lost by the
Revolutionary parties in the different countries only tended to close
their ranks more and more for the decisive action.

The decisive action drew near. It could be fought in France only; for
France, as long as England took no part in the revolutionary strife,
or as Germany remained divided, was, by its national independence,
civilization, and centralization, the only country to impart the
impulse of a mighty convulsion to the surrounding countries.
Accordingly, when, on the 23rd of June, 1848, the bloody struggle
began in Paris, when every succeeding telegraph or mail more clearly
exposed the fact to the eyes of Europe, that this struggle was carried
on between the mass of the working people on the one hand, and all the
other classes of the Parisian population, supported by the army, on
the other; when the fighting went on for several days with an
exasperation unequalled in the history of modern civil warfare, but
without any apparent advantage for either side--then it became evident
to every one that this was the great decisive battle which would, if
the insurrection were victorious, deluge the whole continent with
renewed revolutions, or, if it was suppressed, bring about an at least
momentary restoration of counter-revolutionary rule.

The proletarians of Paris were defeated, decimated, crushed with such
an effect that even now they have not yet recovered from the blow. And
immediately, all over Europe, the new and old Conservatives and
Counter-Revolutionists raised their heads with an effrontery that
showed how well they understood the importance of the event. The Press
was everywhere attacked, the rights of meeting and association were
interfered with, every little event in every small provincial town was
taken profit of to disarm the people to declare a state of siege, to
drill the troops in the new manoeuvres and artifices that Cavaignac
had taught them. Besides, for the first time since February, the
invincibility of a popular insurrection in a large town had been
proved to be a delusion; the honor of the armies had been restored;
the troops hitherto always defeated in street battles of importance
regained confidence in their efficiency even in this kind of struggle.

From this defeat of the _ouvriers_ of Paris may be dated the first
positive steps and definite plans of the old feudal bureaucratic party
in Germany, to get rid even of their momentary allies, the middle
classes, and to restore Germany to the state she was in before the
events of March. The army again was the decisive power in the State,
and the army belonged not to the middle classes but to themselves.
Even in Prussia, where before 1848 a considerable leaning of part of
the lower grades of officers towards a Constitutional Government had
been observed, the disorder introduced into the army by the Revolution
had brought back those reasoning young men to their allegiance; as
soon as the private soldier took a few liberties with regard to the
officers, the necessity of discipline and passive obedience became at
once strikingly evident to them. The vanquished nobles and bureaucrats
now began to see their way before them; the army, more united than
ever, flushed with victory in minor insurrections and in foreign
warfare, jealous of the great success the French soldiers had just
attained--this army had only to be kept in constant petty conflicts
with the people, and the decisive moment once at hand, it could with
one great blow crush the Revolutionists, and set aside the
presumptions of the middle class Parliamentarians. And the proper
moment for such a decisive blow arrived soon enough.

We pass over the sometimes curious, but mostly tedious, parliamentary
proceedings and local struggles that occupied, in Germany, the
different parties during the summer. Suffice it to say that the
supporters of the middle class interest in spite of numerous
parliamentary triumphs, not one of which led to any practical result,
very generally felt that their position between the extreme parties
became daily more untenable, and that, therefore, they were obliged
now to seek the alliance of the reactionists, and the next day to
court the favor of the more popular factions. This constant
vacillation gave the finishing stroke to their character in public
opinion, and according to the turn events were taking, the contempt
into which they had sunk, profited for the movement principally to the
bureaucrats and feudalists.

By the beginning of autumn the relative position of the different
parties had become exasperated and critical enough to make a decisive
battle inevitable. The first engagements in this war between the
democratic and revolutionary masses and the army took place at
Frankfort. Though a mere secondary engagement, it was the first
advantage of any note the troops acquired over the insurrection, and
had a great moral effect. The fancy Government established by the
Frankfort National Assembly had been allowed by Prussia, for very
obvious reasons, to conclude an armistice with Denmark, which not only
surrendered to Danish vengeance the Germans of Schleswig, but which
also entirely disclaimed the more or less revolutionary principles
which were generally supposed in the Danish war. This armistice was,
by a majority of two or three, rejected in the Frankfort Assembly. A
sham ministerial crisis followed this vote, but three days later the
Assembly reconsidered their vote, and were actually induced to cancel
it and acknowledge the armistice. This disgraceful proceeding roused
the indignation of the people. Barricades were erected, but already
sufficient troops had been drawn to Frankfort, and after six hours'
fighting, the insurrection was suppressed. Similar, but less
important, movements connected with this event took place in other
parts of Germany (Baden, Cologne), but were equally defeated.

This preliminary engagement gave to the Counter-Revolutionary party
the one great advantage, that now the only Government which had
entirely--at least in semblance--originated with popular election, the
Imperial Government of Frankfort, as well as the National Assembly,
was ruined in the eyes of the people. This Government and this
Assembly had been obliged to appeal to the bayonets of the troops
against the manifestation of the popular will. They were compromised,
and what little regard they might have been hitherto enabled to claim,
this repudiation of their origin, the dependency upon the anti-popular
Governments and their troops, made both the Lieutenant of the Empire,
his ministers and his deputies, henceforth to be complete nullities.
We shall soon see how first Austria, then Prussia, and later on the
smaller States too, treated with contempt every order, every request,
every deputation they received from this body of impotent dreamers.

We now come to the great counter-stroke in Germany, of the French
battle of June, to that event which was as decisive for Germany as the
proletarian struggle of Paris had been for France; we mean the
revolution and subsequent storming of Vienna, October, 1848. But the
importance of this battle is such, and the explanation of the
different circumstances that more immediately contributed to its issue
will take up such a portion of _The Tribune's_ columns, as to
necessitate its being treated in a separate letter.

LONDON, February, 1852.




XI.

THE VIENNA INSURRECTION.


                                          MARCH 19th, 1852.

We now come to the decisive event which formed the
counter-revolutionary part in Germany to the Parisian insurrection of
June, and which, by a single blow, turned the scale in favor of the
Counter-Revolutionary party,--the insurrection of October, 1848, in
Vienna.

We have seen what the position of the different classes was, in
Vienna, after the victory of 12th March. We have also seen how the
movement of German-Austria was entangled with and impeded by the
events in the non-German provinces of Austria. It only remains for us,
then, briefly to survey the causes which led to this last and most
formidable rising of German-Austria.

The high aristocracy and the stock-jobbing bourgeoisie, which had
formed the principal non-official supports of the Metternichian
Government, were enabled, even after the events of March, to maintain
a predominating influence with the Government, not only by the Court,
the army and the bureaucracy, but still more by the horror of
"anarchy," which rapidly spread among the middle classes. They very
soon ventured a few feelers in the shape of a Press Law, a nondescript
Aristocratic Constitution, and an Electoral Law based upon the old
division of "estates." The so-called Constitutional ministry,
consisting of half Liberal, timid, incapable bureaucrats, on the 14th
of May, even ventured a direct attack upon the revolutionary
organizations of the masses by dissolving the Central Committee of
Delegates of the National Guard and Academic Legion; a body formed for
the express purpose of controlling the Government, and calling out
against it, in case of need, the popular forces. But this act only
provoked the insurrection of the 15th May, by which the Government was
forced to acknowledge the Committee, to repeal the Constitution and
the Electoral Law and to grant the power of framing a new Fundamental
Law to a Constitutional Diet, elected by universal suffrage. All this
was confirmed on the following day by an Imperial proclamation. But
the reactionary party, which also had its representatives in the
ministry, soon got their "Liberal" colleagues to undertake a new
attack upon the popular conquests. The Academic Legion, the stronghold
of the movement party, the centre of continuous agitation, had, on
this very account, become obnoxious to the more moderate burghers of
Vienna; on the 26th a ministerial decree dissolved it. Perhaps this
blow might have succeeded, if it had been carried out by a part of the
National Guard only, but the Government, not trusting them either,
brought the military forward, and at once the National Guard turned
round, united with the Academic Legion, and thus frustrated the
ministerial project.

In the meantime, however, the Emperor and his Court had, on the 16th
of May, left Vienna, and fled to Innspruck. Here surrounded by the
bigoted Tyroleans, whose loyalty was roused again by the danger of an
invasion of their country by the Sardo-Lombardian army, supported by
the vicinity of Radetzky's troops, within shell-range of whom
Innspruck lay, here the Counter-Revolutionary party found an asylum,
from whence, uncontrolled, unobserved and safe, it might rally its
scattered forces, repair and spread again all over the country the
network of its plots. Communications were reopened with Radetzky, with
Jellachich, and with Windischgrätz, as well as with the reliable men
in the administrative hierarchy of the different provinces; intrigues
were set on foot with the Slavonic chiefs, and thus a real force at
the disposal of the Counter-Revolutionary camarilla was formed, while
the impotent ministers in Vienna were allowed to wear their short and
feeble popularity out in continual bickerings with the revolutionary
masses, and in the debates of the forthcoming Constituent Assembly.
Thus the policy of leaving the movement of the capital to itself for a
time; a policy which must have led to the omnipotence of the movement
party in a centralized and homogeneous country like France, here in
Austria, in a heterogeneous political conglomerate, was one of the
safest means of reorganizing the strength of the reactionists.

In Vienna the middle class, persuaded that after three successive
defeats, and in the face of a Constituent Assembly based upon
universal suffrage, the Court was no longer an opponent to be dreaded,
fell more and more into that weariness and apathy, and that eternal
outcry for order and tranquillity, which has everywhere seized this
class after violent commotions and consequent derangement of trade.
The manufactures of the Austrian capital are almost exclusively
limited to articles of luxury, for which, since the Revolution and the
flight of the Court, there had necessarily been little demand. The
shout for a return to a regular system of government, and for a return
of the Court, both of which were expected to bring about a revival of
commercial prosperity--this shout became now general among the middle
classes. The meeting of the Constituent Assembly in July was hailed
with delight as the end of the revolutionary era; so was the return of
the Court, which, after the victories of Radetzky in Italy, and after
the advent of the reactionary ministry of Doblhoff, considered itself
strong enough to brave the popular torrent, and which, at the same
time, was wanted in Vienna in order to complete its intrigues with the
Slavonic majority of the Diet. While the Constituent Diet discussed
the laws on the emancipation of the peasantry from feudal bondage and
forced labor for the nobility, the Court completed a master stroke. On
the 19th of August the Emperor was made to review the National Guard;
the Imperial family, the courtiers, the general officers, outbade each
other in flatteries to the armed burghers, who were already
intoxicated with pride at thus seeing themselves publicly acknowledged
as one of the important bodies of the State; and immediately
afterwards a decree, signed by Herr Schwarzer, the only popular
minister in the Cabinet, was published, withdrawing the Government
aid, given hitherto to the workmen out of employ. The trick succeeded;
the working classes got up a demonstration; the middle class National
Guards declared for the decree of their minister; they were launched
upon the "Anarchists," fell like tigers on the unarmed and unresisting
workpeople, and massacred a great number of them on the 23rd of
August. Thus the unity and strength of the revolutionary force was
broken; the class-struggle between bourgeois and proletarian had come
in Vienna, too, to a bloody outbreak, and the counter-revolutionary
camarilla saw the day approaching on which it might strike its grand
blow.

The Hungarian affairs very soon offered an opportunity to proclaim
openly the principles upon which it intended to act. On the 5th
of October an Imperial decree in the _Vienna Gazette_--a
decree countersigned by none of the responsible ministers for
Hungary--declared the Hungarian Diet dissolved, and named the Ban
Jellachich, of Croatia, civil and military governor of that
country--Jellachich, the leader of South Slavonian reaction, a man
who was actually at war with the lawful authorities of Hungary. At the
same time orders were given to the troops in Vienna to march out and
form part of the army which was to enforce Jellachich's authority.
This, however, was showing the cloven foot too openly; every man in
Vienna felt that war upon Hungary was war upon the principle of
constitutional government, which principle was in the very decree
trampled upon by the attempt of the emperor to make decrees with legal
force, without the countersign of a responsible minister. The people,
the Academic Legion, the National Guard of Vienna, on the 6th of
October rose in mass, and resisted the departure of the troops; some
grenadiers passed over to the people; a short struggle took place
between the popular forces and the troops; the minister of war,
Latour, was massacred by the people, and in the evening the latter
were victors. In the meantime, Ban Jellachich, beaten at
Stuhlweissenburg by Perczel, had taken refuge near Vienna on
German-Austrian territory; the Viennese troops that were to march to
his support now took up an ostensibly hostile and defensive position
against him; and the emperor and court had again fled to Olmütz, on
semi-Slavonic territory.

But at Olmütz the Court found itself in very different circumstances
from what it had been at Innspruck. It was now in a position to open
immediately the campaign against the Revolution. It was surrounded by
the Slavonian deputies of the Constituent, who flocked in masses to
Olmütz, and by the Slavonian enthusiasts from all parts of the
monarchy. The campaign, in their eyes, was to be a war of Slavonian
restoration and of extermination, against the two intruders, upon what
was considered Slavonian soil, against the German and the Magyar.
Windischgrätz, the conqueror of Prague, now commander of the army that
was concentrated around Vienna, became at once the hero of Slavonian
nationality. And his army concentrated rapidly from all sides. From
Bohemia, Moravia, Styria, Upper Austria, and Italy, marched regiment
after regiment on routes that converged at Vienna, to join the troops
of Jellachich and the ex-garrison of the capital. Above sixty thousand
men were thus united towards the end of October, and soon they
commenced hemming in the imperial city on all sides, until, on the
30th of October, they were far enough advanced to venture upon the
decisive attack.

In Vienna, in the meantime, confusion and helplessness was prevalent.
The middle class, as soon as the victory was gained, became again
possessed of their old distrust against the "anarchic" working
classes; the working men, mindful of the treatment they had received,
six weeks before, at the hands of the armed tradesmen, and of the
unsteady, wavering policy of the middle class at large, would not
trust to them the defence of the city, and demanded arms and military
organization for themselves. The Academic Legion, full of zeal for the
struggle against imperial despotism, were entirely incapable of
understanding the nature of the estrangement of the two classes, or
of otherwise comprehending the necessities of the situation. There was
confusion in the public mind, confusion in the ruling councils. The
remnant of the German Diet deputies, and a few Slavonians, acting the
part of spies for their friends at Olmütz, besides a few of the more
revolutionary Polish deputies, sat in permanency; but instead of
taking part resolutely, they lost all their time in idle debates upon
the possibility of resisting the imperial army without overstepping
the bounds of constitutional conventionalities. The committee of
safety, composed of deputies from almost all the popular bodies of
Vienna, although resolved to resist, was yet dominated by a majority
of burghers and petty tradesmen, who never allowed it to follow up any
determined, energetic line of action. The council of the Academic
Legion passed heroic resolutions, but was in no way able to take the
lead. The working classes, distrusted, disarmed, disorganized, hardly
emerging from the intellectual bondage of the old _régime_, hardly
awaking, not to a knowledge, but to a mere instinct of their social
position and proper political line of action, could only make
themselves heard by loud demonstrations, and could not be expected to
be up to the difficulties of the moment. But they were ready--as they
ever were in Germany during the revolution--to fight to the last, as
soon as they obtained arms.

That was the state of things in Vienna. Outside, the reorganized
Austrian army flushed with the victories of Radetzky in Italy; sixty
or seventy thousand men well armed, well organized, and if not well
commanded at least possessing commanders. Inside, confusion, class
division, disorganization; a national guard part of which was resolved
not to fight at all, part irresolute, and only the smallest part ready
to act; a proletarian mass, powerful by numbers but without leaders,
without any political education, subject to panic as well as to fits
of fury almost without cause, a prey to every false rumor spread
about, quite ready to fight, but unarmed, at least in the beginning,
and incompletely armed, and barely organized when at last they were
led to battle; a helpless Diet, discussing theoretical quibbles while
the roof over their heads was almost burning; a leading committee
without impulse or energy. Everything was changed from the days of
March and May, when, in the counter-revolutionary camp, all was
confusion, and when the only organized force was that created by the
revolution. There could hardly be a doubt about the issue of such a
struggle, and whatever doubt there might be, was settled by the events
of the 30th and 31st of October, and 1st November.

LONDON, March, 1852.




XII.

THE STORMING OF VIENNA--THE BETRAYAL OF VIENNA.


                                          APRIL 9th, 1852.

When at last the concentrated army of Windischgrätz commenced the
attack upon Vienna, the forces that could be brought forward in
defence were exceedingly insufficient for the purpose. Of the National
Guard only a portion was to be brought to the entrenchments. A
Proletarian Guard, it is true, had at last been hastily formed, but
owing to the lateness of the attempt to thus make available the most
numerous, most daring, and most energetic part of the population, it
was too little inured to the use of arms and to the very first
rudiments of discipline to offer a successful resistance. Thus the
Academic Legion, three to four thousand strong, well exercised and
disciplined to a certain degree, brave and enthusiastic, was,
militarily speaking, the only force which was in a state to do its
work successfully. But what were they, together with the few reliable
National Guards, and with the confused mass of the armed proletarians,
in opposition to the far more numerous regulars of Windischgrätz, not
counting even the brigand hordes of Jellachich, hordes that were, by
the very nature of their habits, very useful in a war from house to
house, from lane to lane? And what but a few old, outworn,
ill-mounted, and ill-served pieces of ordnance had the insurgents to
oppose to that numerous and well-appointed artillery, of which
Windischgrätz made such an unscrupulous use?

The nearer the danger drew, the more grew the confusion in Vienna. The
Diet, up to the last moment, could not collect sufficient energy to
call in for aid the Hungarian army of Perczel, encamped a few leagues
below the capital. The committee passed contradictory resolutions,
they themselves being, like the popular armed masses, floated up and
down with the alternately rising and receding tide of rumors and
counter-rumors. There was only one thing upon which all agreed--to
respect property; and this was done in a degree almost ludicrous for
such times. As to the final arrangement of a plan of defence, very
little was done. Bem, the only man present who could have saved
Vienna, if any could then in Vienna, an almost unknown foreigner, a
Slavonian by birth, gave up the task, overwhelmed as he was by
universal distrust. Had he persevered, he might have been lynched as a
traitor. Messenhauser, the commander of the insurgent forces, more of
a novel-writer than even of a subaltern officer, was totally
inadequate to the task; and yet, after eight months of revolutionary
struggles, the popular party had not produced or acquired a military
man of more ability than he. Thus the contest began. The Viennese
considering their utterly inadequate means of defence, considering
their utter absence of military skill and organization in the ranks,
offered a most heroic resistance. In many places the order given by
Bem, when he was in command, "to defend that post to the last man,"
was carried out to the letter. But force prevailed. Barricade after
barricade was swept away by the imperial artillery in the long and
wide avenues which form the main streets of the suburbs; and on the
evening of the second day's fighting the Croats occupied the range of
houses facing the glacis of the Old Town. A feeble and disorderly
attack of the Hungarian army had been utterly defeated; and during an
armistice, while some parties in the Old Town capitulated, while
others hesitated and spread confusion, while the remnants of the
Academic Legion prepared fresh intrenchments, an entrance was made by
the imperialists, and in the midst of the general disorder the Old
Town was carried.

The immediate consequences of this victory, the brutalities and
executions by martial law, the unheard-of cruelties and infamies
committed by the Slavonian hordes let loose upon Vienna, are too well
known to be detailed here. The ulterior consequences, the entirely new
turn given to German affairs by the defeat of the revolution in
Vienna, we shall have reason to notice hereafter. There remain two
points to be considered in connection with the storming of Vienna.
The people of that capital had two allies--the Hungarians and the
German people. Where were they in the hour of trial?

We have seen that the Viennese, with all the generosity of a newly
freed people, had risen for a cause which, though ultimately their
own, was in the first instance, and above all, that of the Hungarians.
Rather than suffer the Austrian troops to march upon Hungary, they
would draw their first and most terrific onslaught upon themselves.
And while they thus nobly came forward for the support of their
allies, the Hungarians, successful against Jellachich, drove him upon
Vienna, and by their victory strengthened the force that was to attack
that town. Under these circumstances it was the clear duty of Hungary
to support, without delay, and with all disposable forces, not the
Diet of Vienna, not the Committee of Safety or any other official body
at Vienna, but the _Viennese_ revolution. And if Hungary should even
have forgotten that Vienna had fought the first battle of Hungary, she
owed it to her own safety not to forget that Vienna was the only
outpost of Hungarian independence, and that after the fall of Vienna
nothing could meet the advance of the imperial troops against herself.
Now, we know very well all the Hungarians can say and have said in
defence of their inactivity during the blockade and storming of
Vienna: the insufficient state of their own force, the refusal of the
Diet or any other official body in Vienna to call them in, the
necessity to keep on constitutional ground, and to avoid
complications with the German central power. But the fact is, as to
the insufficient state of the Hungarian army, that in the first days
after the Viennese revolution and the arrival of Jellachich, nothing
was wanted in the shape of regular troops, as the Austrian regulars
were very far from being concentrated; and that a courageous,
unrelenting following up of the first advantage over Jellachich, even
with nothing but the _Land Sturm_ that had fought at Stuhlweissenburg,
would have sufficed to effect a junction with the Viennese, and to
adjourn to that day six months every concentration of an Austrian
army. In war, and particularly in revolutionary warfare, rapidity of
action until some decided advantage is gained is the first rule, and
we have no hesitation in saying that upon _merely military grounds_.
Perczel ought not to have stopped until his junction with the Viennese
was affected. There was certainly some risk, but who ever won a battle
without risking something? And did the people of Vienna risk nothing
when they drew upon themselves--they, a population of four hundred
thousand--the forces that were to march to the conquest of twelve
millions of Hungarians? The military fault committed by waiting until
the Austrians had united, and by making the feeble demonstration at
Schwechat which ended, as it deserved to do, in an inglorious
defeat--this military fault certainly incurred more risks than a
resolute march upon Vienna against the disbanded brigands of
Jellachich would have done.

But, it is said, such an advance of the Hungarians, unless authorized
by some official body, would have been a violation of the German
territory, would have brought on complications with the central power
at Frankfort, and would have been, above all, an abandonment of the
legal and constitutional policy which formed the strength of the
Hungarian cause. Why, the official bodies in Vienna were nonentities!
Was it the Diet, was it the popular committees, who had risen for
Hungary, or was it the people of Vienna, and they alone, who had taken
to the musket to stand the brunt of the first battle for Hungary's
independence? It was not this nor that official body in Vienna which
it was important to uphold; all these bodies might, and would have
been, upset very soon in the progress of the revolutionary
development; but it was the ascendancy of the revolutionary movement,
the unbroken progress of popular action itself, which alone was in
question, and which alone could save Hungary from invasion. What forms
this revolutionary movement afterwards might take, was the business of
the Viennese, not of the Hungarians, so long as Vienna and German
Austria at large continued their allies against the common enemy. But
the question is, whether in this stickling of the Hungarian government
for some quasi-legal authorization, we are not to see the first clear
symptom of that pretence to a rather doubtful legality of proceeding,
which, if it did not save Hungary, at least told very well, at a later
period, before the English middle class audiences.

As to the pretext of possible conflicts with the central power of
Germany at Frankfort, it is quite futile. The Frankfort authorities
were _de facto_ upset by the victory of the counter-revolution at
Vienna; they would have been equally upset had the revolution there
found the support necessary to defeat its enemies. And lastly, the
great argument that Hungary could not leave legal and constitutional
ground, may do very well for British free-traders, but it will never
be deemed sufficient in the eyes of history. Suppose the people of
Vienna had stuck to "legal and constitutional means" on the 13th of
March, and on the 6th of October, what then of the "legal and
constitutional" movement, and of all the glorious battles which, for
the first time, brought Hungary to the notice of the civilized world?
The very legal and constitutional ground upon which it is asserted the
Hungarians moved in 1848 and 1849 was conquered for them by the
exceedingly illegal and unconstitutional rising of the people of
Vienna on the 13th March. It is not to our purpose here to discuss the
revolutionary history of Hungary, but it may be deemed proper if we
observe that it is utterly useless to professedly use merely legal
means of resistance against an enemy who scorns such scruples; and if
we add, that had it not been for this eternal pretence of legality
which Görgey seized upon and turned against the Government, the
devotion of Görgey's army to its general, and the disgraceful
catastrophe of Villagos, would have been impossible. And when, at
last, to save their honor, the Hungarians came across the Leitha, in
the latter end of October, 1848, was not this quite as illegal as any
immediate and resolute attack would have been?

We are known to harbor no unfriendly feeling toward Hungary. We stood
by her during the struggles; we may be allowed to say that our paper,
the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_,[8] has done more than any other to
render the Hungarian cause popular in Germany, by explaining the
nature of the struggle between the Magyar and Slavonian races, and by
following up the Hungarian war in a series of articles which have had
paid them the compliment of being plagiarized in almost every
subsequent book upon the subject, the works of native Hungarians and
"eyewitnesses" not excepted. We even now, in any future continental
convulsion, consider Hungary as the necessary and natural ally of
Germany. But we have been severe enough upon our own countrymen, to
have a right to speak out upon our neighbors; and then we have here to
record facts with historical impartiality, and we must say that in
this particular instance, the generous bravery of the people of Vienna
was not only far more noble, but also more far-sighted than the
cautious circumspection of the Hungarian Government. And, as a German,
we may further be allowed to say, that not for all the showy victories
and glorious battles of the Hungarian campaign, would we exchange that
spontaneous, single-handed rising, and heroic resistance of the people
of Vienna, our countrymen, which gave Hungary the time to organize the
army that could do such great things.

The second ally of Vienna was the German people. But they were
everywhere engaged in the same struggle as the Viennese. Frankfort,
Baden, Cologne, had just been defeated and disarmed. In Berlin and
Breslau the people were at daggers-drawn with the army, and daily
expected to come to blows. Thus it was in every local center of
action. Everywhere questions were pending that could only be settled
by the force of arms; and now it was that for the first time were
severely felt the disastrous consequences of the continuation of the
old dismemberment and decentralization of Germany. The different
questions in every State, every province, every town, were
fundamentally the same; but they were brought forward everywhere under
different shapes and pretexts, and had everywhere attained different
degrees of maturity. Thus it happened that while in every locality
the decisive gravity of the events at Vienna was felt, yet nowhere
could an important blow be struck with any hope of bringing the
Viennese succor, or making a diversion in their favor; and there
remained nothing to aid them but the Parliament and Central Power of
Frankfort; they were appealed to on all hands; but what did they do?

The Frankfort Parliament and the bastard child it had brought to light
by incestuous intercourse with the old German Diet, the so-called
Central Power, profited by the Viennese movement to show forth their
utter nullity. This contemptible Assembly, as we have seen, had long
since sacrificed its virginity, and young as it was, it was already
turning grey-headed and experienced in all the artifices of painting
and pseudo-diplomatic prostitution. Of the dreams and illusions of
power, of German regeneration and unity, that in the beginning had
pervaded it, nothing remained but a set of Teutonic clap-trap
phraseology, that was repeated on every occasion, and a firm belief of
each individual member in his own importance, as well as in the
credulity of the public. The original naivety was discarded; the
representatives of the German people had turned practical men, that is
to say, they had made it out that the less they did, and the more they
prated, the safer would be their position as the umpires of the fate
of Germany. Not that they considered their proceedings superfluous;
quite the contrary. But they had found out that all really great
questions, being to them forbidden ground, had better be let alone,
and there, like a set of Byzantine doctors of the Lower Empire, they
discussed with an importance and assiduity worthy of the fate that at
last overtook them, theoretical dogmas long ago settled in every part
of the civilized world, or microscopical practical questions which
never led to any practical result. Thus, the Assembly being a sort of
Lancastrian School for the mutual instruction of members, and being,
therefore, very important to themselves, they were persuaded it was
doing even more than the German people had a right to expect, and
looked upon everyone as a traitor to the country who had impudence to
ask them to come to any result.

When the Viennese insurrection broke out, there was a host of
interpellations, debates, motions, and amendments upon it, which, of
course, led to nothing. The Central Power was to interfere. It sent
two commissioners, Welcker, the ex-Liberal, and Mosle, to Vienna. The
travels of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza form matter for an Odyssey in
comparison with the heroic feats and wonderful adventures of those two
knight-errants of German Unity. Not daring to go to Vienna, they were
bullied by Windischgrätz, wondered at by the idiot Emperor, and
impudently hoaxed by the Minister Stadion. Their despatches and
reports are perhaps the only portion of the Frankfort transactions
that will retain a place in German literature; they are a perfect
satirical romance, ready cut and dried, and an eternal monument of
disgrace for the Frankfort Assembly and its Government.

The left side of the Assembly had also sent two commissioners to
Vienna, in order to uphold its authority there--Froebel and Robert
Blum. Blum, when danger drew near, judged rightly that here the great
battle of the German Revolution was to be fought, and unhesitatingly
resolved to stake his head on the issue. Froebel, on the contrary, was
of opinion that it was his duty to preserve himself for the important
duties of his post at Frankfort. Blum was considered one of the most
eloquent men of the Frankfort Assembly; he certainly was the most
popular. His eloquence would not have stood the test of any
experienced Parliamentary Assembly; he was too fond of the shallow
declamations of a German dissenting preacher, and his arguments wanted
both philosophical acumen and acquaintance with practical matters of
fact. In politics he belonged to "Moderate Democracy," a rather
indefinite sort of thing, cherished on account of this very want of
definiteness in its principles. But with all this Robert Blum was by
nature a thorough, though somewhat polished, plebeian, and in decisive
moments his plebeian instinct and plebeian energy got the better of
his indefiniteness, and, therefore, indecisive political persuasion
and knowledge. In such moments he raised himself far above the usual
standard of his capacities.

Thus, in Vienna, he saw at a glance that here, not in the midst of the
would-be elegant debates of Frankfort, the fate of his country would
have to be decided. He at once made up his mind, gave up all idea of
retreat, took a command in the revolutionary force, and behaved with
extraordinary coolness and decision. It was he who retarded for a
considerable time the taking of the town, and covered one of its sides
from attack by burning the Tabor Bridge over the Danube. Everybody
knows how, after the storming, he was arrested, tried by
court-martial, and shot. He died like a hero. And the Frankfort
Assembly, horrorstruck as it was, yet took the bloody insult with a
seeming good grace. A resolution was carried, which, by the softness
and diplomatic decency of its language, was more an insult to the
grave of the murdered martyr than a damning stain upon Austria. But it
was not to be expected that this contemptible Assembly should resent
the assassination of one of its members, particularly of the leader of
the Left.

LONDON, March, 1852.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] "Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (The New Rhenish Gazette). After the
March revolution, 1848, Marx returned from Paris to Germany, and
settling down--for the time being--at Cologne, founded this paper.
Although the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" never went in for propounding
"Communist schemes," as Mr. Dawson, e.g., says it did, it became a
very nightmare to the Government. Reactionaries and Liberals alike
denounced the "Gazette," especially after Marx's brilliant defence of
the Paris Insurrection of June. The state of siege being declared in
Cologne, the "Gazette" was suspended for six weeks--only to appear
with a bigger reputation and bigger circulation than before. After the
Prussian "coup d'état" in November, the "Gazette" published at the
head of every issue an appeal to the people to refuse to pay taxes,
and to meet force by force. For this and certain other articles the
paper was twice prosecuted. On the first occasion the accused were
Marx, Engels, and Korff; on the second and more important trial, they
were Marx, Schapper, and Schneider. The accused were charged with
"inciting the people to armed resistance against the Government and
its officials." Marx mainly conducted the defence, and delivered a
brilliant speech. "Marx refrains" (in this speech) "from all
oratorical flourish; he goes straight to the point, and without any
peroration ends with a summary of the political situation. Anyone
would think that Marx's own personality was to deliver a political
lecture to the jury. And, in fact, at the end of the trial, one of the
jurors went to Marx to thank him, in the name of his colleagues, for
the instructive lecture he had given them." (See Bernstein's work,
"Ferdinand Lassalle.") The accused were unanimously acquitted by the
jury. Among the better known of the contributors of the "New Rhenish
Gazette," edited by Marx, were Engels, W. Wolff, Werth, Lassalle;
while Freiligrath wrote for it his splendid revolutionary poems.
Perhaps one of the grandest of these is the celebrated "Farewell of
the 'Rhenish Gazette'," when on the 19th May, 1849, the final number
of the paper--suppressed by the Government--appeared, printed in red
type.

    "When the last of crowns like glass shall break,
      On the scene our sorrows have haunted,
    And the people the last dread 'Guilty' shall speak,
      By your side ye shall find me undaunted.
    On Rhine or on Danube, in word and deed,
      You shall witness, true to his vow,
    On the wrecks of thrones, in the midst of the freed
      The rebel who greets you now."

                    (Translated by Ernest Jones.)





XIII.

THE PRUSSIAN ASSEMBLY--THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.


                                          APRIL 17th, 1852.

On the 1st of November Vienna fell, and on the 9th of the same month
the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly in Berlin showed how much
this event had at once raised the spirit and the strength of the
Counter-Revolutionary party all over Germany.

The events of the summer of 1848 in Prussia are soon told. The
Constituent Assembly, or rather "the Assembly elected for the purpose
of agreeing upon a Constitution with the Crown," and its majority of
representatives of the middle class interest, had long since forfeited
all public esteem by lending itself to all the intrigues of the Court,
from fear of the more energetic elements of the population. They had
confirmed, or rather restored, the obnoxious privileges of feudalism,
and thus betrayed the liberty and the interests of the peasantry. They
had neither been able to draw up a Constitution, nor to amend in any
way the general legislation. They had occupied themselves almost
exclusively with nice theoretical distinctions, mere formalities, and
questions of constitutional etiquette. The Assembly, in fact, was more
a school of Parliamentary _savoir vivre_ for its members, than a body
in which the people could take any interest. The majorities were,
besides, very nicely balanced, and almost always decided by the
wavering centers whose oscillations from right to left, and _vice
versa_, upset, first the ministry of Camphausen, then that of
Auerswald and Hansemann. But while thus the Liberals, here as
everywhere else, let the occasion slip out of their hands, the Court
reorganized its elements of strength among the nobility, and the most
uncultivated portion of the rural population, as well as in the army
and the bureaucracy. After Hansemann's downfall, a ministry of
bureaucrats and military officers, all staunch reactionists, was
formed, which, however, seemingly gave way to the demands of the
Parliament; and the Assembly acting upon the commodious principle of
"measures, not men," were actually duped into applauding this
ministry, while they, of course, had no eyes for the concentration and
organization of Counter-Revolutionary forces, which that same ministry
carried on pretty openly. At last, the signal being given by the fall
of Vienna, the King dismissed its ministers, and replaced them by "men
of action," under the leadership of the present premier, Manteuffel.
Then the dreaming Assembly at once awoke to the danger; it passed a
vote of no confidence in the Cabinet, which was at once replied to by
a decree removing the Assembly from Berlin, where it might, in case of
a conflict, count upon the support of the masses, to Brandenburg, a
petty provincial town dependent entirely upon the Government. The
Assembly, however, declared that it could not be adjourned, removed or
dissolved, except with its own consent. In the meantime, General
Wrangle entered Berlin at the head of some forty thousand troops. In a
meeting of the municipal magistrates and the officers of the National
Guard, it was resolved not to offer any resistance. And now, after the
Assembly and its Constituents, the Liberal bourgeoisie, had allowed
the combined reactionary party to occupy every important position, and
to wrest from their hands almost every means of defence, began that
grand comedy of "passive and legal resistance" which they intended to
be a glorious imitation of the example of Hampden, and of the first
efforts of the Americans in the War of Independence. Berlin was
declared in a state of siege, and Berlin remained tranquil; the
National Guard was dissolved by the Government, and its arms were
delivered up with the greatest punctuality. The Assembly was hunted
down during a fortnight, from one place of meeting to another, and
everywhere dispersed by the military, and the members of the Assembly
begged of the citizens to remain tranquil. At last the Government
having declared the Assembly dissolved, it passed a resolution to
declare the levying of taxes illegal, and then its members dispersed
themselves over the country to organize the refusal of taxes. But
they found that they had been woefully mistaken in the choice of their
means. After a few agitated weeks, followed by severe measures of the
Government against the Opposition, everyone gave up the idea of
refusing the taxes in order to please a defunct Assembly that had not
even had the courage to defend itself.

Whether it was in the beginning of November, 1848, already too late to
try armed resistance, or whether a part of the army, on finding
serious opposition, would have turned over to the side of the
Assembly, and thus decided the matter in its favor, is a question
which may never be solved. But in revolution as in war, it is always
necessary to show a strong front, and he who attacks is in the
advantage; and in revolution as in war, it is of the highest necessity
to stake everything on the decisive moment, whatever the odds may be.
There is not a single successful revolution in history that does not
prove the truth of these axioms. Now, for the Prussian Revolution, the
decisive moment had come in November, 1848; the Assembly, at the head,
officially, of the whole revolutionary interest, did neither show a
strong front, for it receded at every advance of the enemy; much less
did it attack, for it chose even not to defend itself; and when the
decisive moment came, when Wrangle, at the head of forty thousand men,
knocked at the gates of Berlin, instead of finding, as he and all his
officers fully expected, every street studded with barricades, every
window turned into a loophole, he found the gates open, and the
streets obstructed only by peaceful Berliner burghers, enjoying the
joke they had played upon him, by delivering themselves up, hands and
feet tied, unto the astonished soldiers. It is true, the Assembly and
the people, if they had resisted, might have been beaten; Berlin might
have been bombarded, and many hundreds might have been killed, without
preventing the ultimate victory of the Royalist party. But that was no
reason why they should surrender their arms at once. A well-contested
defeat is a fact of as much revolutionary importance as an easily-won
victory. The defeats of Paris in June, 1848, and of Vienna in October,
certainly did far more in revolutionizing the minds of the people of
these two cities than the victories of February and March. The
Assembly and the people of Berlin would, probably, have shared the
fate of the two towns above-named; but they would have fallen
gloriously, and would have left behind themselves, in the minds of the
survivors, a wish of revenge which in revolutionary times is one of
the highest incentives to energetic and passionate action. It is a
matter of course that, in every struggle, he who takes up the gauntlet
risks being beaten; but is that a reason why he should confess himself
beaten, and submit to the yoke without drawing the sword?

In a revolution he who commands a decisive position and surrenders it,
instead of forcing the enemy to try his hands at an assault,
invariably deserves to be treated as a traitor.

The same decree of the King of Prussia which dissolved the Constituent
Assembly also proclaimed a new Constitution, founded upon the draft
which had been made by a Committee of that Assembly, but enlarging in
some points the powers of the Crown, and rendering doubtful in others
those of the Parliament. This Constitution established two Chambers,
which were to meet soon for the purpose of confirming and revising it.

We need hardly ask where the German National Assembly was during the
"legal and peaceful" struggle of the Prussian Constitutionalists. It
was, as usual, at Frankfort, occupied with passing very tame
resolutions against the proceedings of the Prussian Government, and
admiring the "imposing spectacle of the passive, legal, and unanimous
resistance of a whole people against brutal force." The Central
Government sent commissioners to Berlin to intercede between the
Ministry and the Assembly; but they met the same fate as their
predecessors at Olmütz, and were politely shown out. The Left of the
National Assembly, _i.e._, the so-called Radical party, sent also
their commissioners; but after having duly convinced themselves of the
utter helplessness of the Berlin Assembly, and confessed their own
equal helplessness, they returned to Frankfort to report progress, and
to testify to the admirably peaceful conduct of the population of
Berlin. Nay, more; when Herr Bassermann, one of the Central
Government's commissioners, reported that the late stringent measures
of the Prussian ministers were not without foundation, inasmuch as
there had of late been seen loitering about the streets of Berlin
sundry, savage-looking characters, such as always appear previous to
anarchical movements (and which ever since have been named
"Bassermannic characters"), these worthy deputies of the Left and
energetic representatives of the revolutionary interest actually arose
to make oath, and testify that such was not the case! Thus within two
months the total impotency of the Frankfort Assembly was signally
proved. There could be no more glaring proofs that this body was
totally inadequate to its task; nay, that it had not even the remotest
idea of what its task really was. The fact that both in Vienna and in
Berlin the fate of the Revolution was settled, that in both these
capitals the most important and vital questions were disposed of,
without the existence of the Frankfort Assembly ever being taken the
slightest notice of--this fact alone is sufficient to establish that
the body in question was a mere debating-club, composed of a set of
dupes, who allowed the Governments to use them as Parliamentary
puppet, shown to amuse the shopkeepers and petty tradesmen of petty
States and petty towns, as long as it was considered convenient to
divert the attention of these parties. How long this was considered
convenient we shall soon see. But it is a fact worthy of attention
that among all the "eminent" men of this Assembly there was not one
who had the slightest apprehension of the part they were made to
perform, and that even up to the present day ex-members of the
Frankfort Club have invariably organs of historical perception quite
peculiar to themselves.

LONDON, March, 1852.




XIV.

THE RESTORATION OF ORDER--DIET AND CHAMBER


                                          APRIL 24th, 1852.

The first months of the year 1849 were employed by the Austrian and
Prussian Governments in following up the advantages obtained in
October and November, 1848. The Austrian Diet, ever since the taking
of Vienna, had carried on a merely nominal existence in a small
Moravian country-town, named Kremsir. Here the Slavonian deputies,
who, with their constituents, had been mainly instrumental in raising
the Austrian Government from its prostration, were singularly punished
for their treachery against the European Revolution. As soon as the
Government had recovered its strength, it treated the Diet and its
Slavonian majority with the utmost contempt, and when the first
successes of the Imperial arms foreboded a speedy termination of the
Hungarian War, the Diet, on the 4th of March, was dissolved, and the
deputies dispersed by military force. Then at last the Slavonians saw
that they were duped, and then they shouted: "Let us go to Frankfort
and carry on there the opposition which we cannot pursue here!" But it
was then too late, and the very fact that they had no other
alternative than either to remain quiet or to join the impotent
Frankfort Assembly, this fact alone was sufficient to show their utter
helplessness.

Thus ended for the present, and most likely for ever, the attempts of
the Slavonians of Germany to recover an independent national
existence. Scattered remnants of numerous nations, whose nationality
and political vitality had long been extinguished, and who in
consequence had been obliged, for almost a thousand years, to follow
in the wake of a mightier nation, their conqueror, the same as the
Welsh in England, the Basques in Spain, the Bas-Bretons in France, and
at a more recent period the Spanish and French Creoles in those
portions of North America occupied of late by the Anglo-American
race--these dying nationalities, the Bohemians, Carinthians,
Dalmatians, etc., had tried to profit by the universal confusion of
1848, in order to restore their political _status quo_ of A.D. 800.
The history of a thousand years ought to have shown them that such a
retrogression was impossible; that if all the territory east of the
Elbe and Saale had at one time been occupied by kindred Slavonians,
this fact merely proved the historical tendency, and at the same time
physical and intellectual power of the German nation to subdue,
absorb, and assimilate its ancient eastern neighbors; that this
tendency of absorption on the part of the Germans had always been,
and still was, one of the mightiest means by which the civilization of
Western Europe had been spread in the east of that continent; that it
could only cease whenever the process of Germanization had reached the
frontier of large, compact, unbroken nations, capable of an
independent national life, such as the Hungarians, and in some degree
the Poles; and that, therefore, the natural and inevitable fate of
these dying nations was to allow this process of dissolution and
absorption by their stronger neighbors to complete itself. Certainly
this is no very flattering prospect for the national ambition of the
Panslavistic dreamers who succeeded in agitating a portion of the
Bohemian and South Slavonian people; but can they expect that history
would retrograde a thousand years in order to please a few phthisical
bodies of men, who in every part of the territory they occupy are
interspersed with and surrounded by Germans, who from time almost
immemorial have had for all purposes of civilization no other language
but the German, and who lack the very first conditions of national
existence, numbers and compactness of territory? Thus, the
Panslavistic rising, which everywhere in the German and Hungarian
Slavonic territories was the cloak for the restoration to independence
of all these numberless petty nations, everywhere clashed with the
European revolutionary movements, and the Slavonians, although
pretending to fight for liberty, were invariably (the Democratic
portion of the Poles excepted) found on the side of despotism and
reaction. Thus it was in Germany, thus in Hungary, thus even here and
there in Turkey. Traitors to the popular cause, supporters and chief
props to the Austrian Government's cabal, they placed themselves in
the position of outlaws in the eyes of all revolutionary nations. And
although nowhere the mass of the people had a part in the petty
squabbles about nationality raised by the Panslavistic leaders, for
the very reason that they were too ignorant, yet it will never be
forgotten that in Prague, in a half-German town, crowds of Slavonian
fanatics cheered and repeated the cry: "Rather the Russian knout than
German Liberty!" After their first evaporated effort in 1848, and
after the lesson the Austrian Government gave them, it is not likely
that another attempt at a later opportunity will be made. But if they
should try again under similar pretexts to ally themselves to the
counter-revolutionary force, the duty of Germany is clear. No country
in a state of revolution and involved in external war can tolerate a
Vendée in its very heart.

As to the Constitution proclaimed by the Emperor at the same time with
the dissolution of the Diet, there is no need to revert to it, as it
never had a practical existence, and is now done away with altogether.
Absolutism has been restored in Austria to all intents and purposes
ever since the 4th March, 1849.

In Prussia, the Chambers met in February for the ratification and
revision of the new Charter proclaimed by the King. They sat for about
six weeks, humble and meek enough in their behavior toward the
Government, yet not quite prepared to go the lengths the King and his
ministers wished them to go. Therefore, as soon as a suitable occasion
presented itself, they were dissolved.

Thus both Austria and Prussia had for the moment got rid of the
shackles of parliamentary control. The Governments now concentrated
all power in themselves, and could bring that power to bear wherever
is was wanted: Austria upon Hungary and Italy, Prussia upon Germany.
For Prussia, too, was preparing for a campaign by which "order" was to
be restored in the smaller States.

Counter-revolution being now paramount in the two great centres of
action in Germany,--in Vienna and Berlin,--there remained only the
lesser States in which the struggle was still undecided, although the
balance there, too, was leaning more and more against the
revolutionary interest. These smaller States, we have said, found a
common centre in the National Assembly at Frankfort. Now, this
so-called National Assembly, although its reactionist spirit had long
been evident, so much so that the very people of Frankfort had risen
in arms against it, yet its origin was of more or less revolutionary
nature; it occupied an abnormal, revolutionary position in January;
its competence had never been defined, and it had at last come to the
decision--which, however, was never recognized by the larges
States--that its resolutions had the force of law. Under these
circumstances, and when the Constitutionalist-Monarchial party saw
their positions turned by the recovering Absolutists, it is not to be
wondered that the Liberal, monarchical bourgeoisie of almost the whole
of Germany should place their last hopes upon the majority of this
Assembly, just as the petty shopkeepers in the rest, the nucleus of
the Democratic party, gathered in their growing distress around the
minority of that same body, which indeed formed the last compact
Parliamentary phalanx of Democracy. On the other hand, the larger
Governments, and particularly the Prussian Ministry, saw more and more
the incompatibility of such an irregular elective body with the
restored monarchical system of Germany, and if they did not at once
force its dissolution, it was only because the time had not yet come,
and because Prussia hoped first to use it for the furthering of its
own ambitious purposes.

In the meantime, that poor Assembly itself fell into a greater and
greater confusion. Its deputations and commissaries had been treated
with the utmost contempt, both in Vienna and Berlin; one of its
members, in spite of his parliamentary inviolability, had been
executed in Vienna as a common rebel. Its decrees were nowhere heeded;
if they were noticed at all by the larger powers, it was merely by
protesting notes which disputed the authority of the Assembly to pass
laws and resolutions binding upon their Governments. The
Representative of the Assembly, the Central Executive power, was
involved in diplomatic squabbles with almost all the Cabinets of
Germany, and, in spite of all their efforts, neither Assembly nor
Central Government could bring Austria and Prussia to state their
ultimate views, plans and demands. The Assembly, at last, commenced to
see clearly, at least so far, that it had allowed all power to slip
out of its hands, that it was at the mercy of Austria and Prussia, and
that if it intended making a Federal Constitution for Germany at all,
it must set about the thing at once and in good earnest. And many of
the vacillating members also saw clearly that they had been
egregiously duped by the Governments. But what were they, in their
impotent position, able to do now? The only thing that could have
saved them would have been promptly and decidedly to pass over into
the popular camp; but the success, even of that step, was more than
doubtful; and then, where in this helpless crowd of undecided,
shortsighted, self-conceited beings, who, when the eternal noise of
contradictory rumors and diplomatic notes completely stunned them,
sought their only consolation and support in the everlastingly
repeated assurance that they were the best, the greatest, the wisest
men of the country, and that they alone could save Germany--where, we
say, among these poor creatures, whom a single year of Parliamentary
life had turned into complete idiots, where were the men for a prompt
and decisive resolution, much less for energetic and consistent
action?

At last the Austrian Government threw off the mask. In its
Constitution of the 4th of March, it proclaimed Austria an
indivisible monarchy, with common finances, system of customs-duties,
of military establishments, thereby effacing every barrier and
distinction between the German and non-German provinces. This
declaration was made in the face of resolutions and articles of the
intended Federal Constitution which had been already passed by the
Frankfort Assembly. It was the gauntlet of war thrown down to it by
Austria, and the poor Assembly had no other choice but to take it up.
This it did with a deal of blustering, which Austria, in the
consciousness of her power, and of the utter nothingness of the
Assembly, could well afford to allow to pass. And this precious
representation, as it styled itself, of the German people, in order to
revenge itself for this insult on the part of Austria, saw nothing
better before it than to throw itself, hands and feet tied, at the
feet of the Prussian Government. Incredible as it would seem, it bent
its knees before the very ministers whom it had condemned as
unconstitutional and anti-popular, and whose dismissal it had in vain
insisted upon. The details of this disgraceful transaction, and the
tragicomical events that followed, will form the subject of our next.

LONDON, April, 1852.




XV.

THE TRIUMPH OF PRUSSIA.


                                          JULY 27th, 1852.

We now come to the last chapter in the history of the German
Revolution; the conflict of the National Assembly with the Governments
of the different States, especially of Prussia; the insurrection of
Southern and Western Germany, and its final overthrow by Prussia.

We have already seen the Frankfort National Assembly at work. We have
seen it kicked by Austria, insulted by Prussia, disobeyed by the
lesser States, duped by its own impotent Central "Government," which
again was the dupe of all and every prince in the country. But at last
things began to look threatening for this weak, vacillating, insipid
legislative body. It was forced to come to the conclusion that "the
sublime idea of Germany unity was threatened in its realization,"
which meant neither more nor less than that the Frankfort Assembly,
and all it had done, and was about to do, were very likely to end in
smoke. Thus it set to work in good earnest in order to bring forth, as
soon as possible, its grand production, the "Imperial Constitution."
There was, however, one difficulty. What Executive Government was
there to be? An Executive Council? No; that would have been, they
thought in their wisdom, making Germany a Republic. A "president"?
That would come to the same. Thus they must revive the old Imperial
dignity. But--as, of course, a prince was to be emperor--who should
it be? Certainly none of the _Dii minorum gentium_, from
Reuss-Schleitz-Greitz-Lobenstein-Ebersdorf up to Bavaria; neither
Austria nor Prussia would have borne that. It could only be Austria or
Prussia. But which of the two? There is no doubt that, under otherwise
favorable circumstances, this august Assembly would be sitting up to
the present day, discussing this important dilemma without being able
to come to a conclusion, if the Austrian Government had not cut the
Gordian knot, and saved them the trouble.

Austria knew very well that from the moment in which she could again
appear before Europe with all her provinces subdued, as a strong and
great European power, the very law of political gravitation would draw
the remainder of Germany into her orbit, without the help of any
authority which an Imperial crown, conferred by the Frankfort
Assembly, could give her. Austria had been far stronger, far freer in
her movements, since she shook off the powerless _crown_ of the German
Empire--a crown which clogged her own independent policy, while it
added not one iota to her strength, either within or without Germany.
And supposing the case that Austria could not maintain her footing in
Italy and Hungary, why, then she was dissolved, annihilated in Germany
too, and could never pretend to reseize a crown which had slipped from
her hands while she was in the full possession of her strength. Thus
Austria at once declared against all imperialist resurrections, and
plainly demanded the restoration of the German Diet, the only Central
Government of Germany known and recognized by the treaties of 1815;
and on the 4th of March, 1849, issued that Constitution which had no
other meaning than to declare Austria an indivisible, centralized, and
independent monarchy, distinct even from that Germany which the
Frankfort Assembly was to reorganize.

This open declaration of war left, indeed, the Frankfort wiseacres no
other choice but to exclude Austria from Germany, and to create out of
the remainder of that country a sort of lower empire, a "little
Germany," the rather shabby Imperial mantle of which was to fall on
the shoulders of His Majesty of Prussia. This, it will be recollected,
was the renewal of an old project fostered already some six or
eight years ago by a party of South and Middle German Liberal
_doctrinaires_, who considered as a godsend the degrading
circumstances by which their old crotchet was now again brought
forward as the latest "new move" for the salvation of the country.

They accordingly finished, in February and March, 1849, the debate on
the Imperial Constitution, together with the Declaration of Rights
and the Imperial Electoral Law; not, however, without being obliged to
make, in a great many points, the most contradictory concessions--now
to the Conservative or rather Reactionary party--now to the more
advanced factions of the Assembly. In fact, it was evident that the
leadership of the Assembly, which had formerly belonged to the Right
and Right Centre (the Conservatives and Reactionists), was gradually,
although slowly, passing toward the Left or Democratic side of that
body. The rather dubious position of the Austrian deputies in an
Assembly which had excluded their country from Germany, and in which
they yet were called upon to sit and vote, favored the derangement of
its equipoise; and thus, as early as the end of February, the Left
Centre and Left found themselves, by the help of the Austrian votes,
very generally in a majority, while on other days the Conservative
faction of the Austrians, all of a sudden, and for the fun of the
thing, voting with the Right, threw the balance again on the other
side. They intended, by these sudden _soubresauts_, to bring the
Assembly into contempt, which, however, was quite unnecessary, the
mass of the people being long since convinced of the utter hollowness
and futility of anything coming from Frankfort. What a specimen of a
Constitution, in the meantime, was framed under such jumping and
counter-jumping, may easily be imagined.

The Left of the Assembly--this _élite_ and pride of revolutionary
Germany, as it believed itself to be--was entirely intoxicated with
the few paltry successes it obtained by the good-will, or rather the
ill-will, of a set of Austrian politicians, acting under the
instigation and for the interest of Austrian despotism. Whenever the
slightest approximation to their own not very well-defined principles
had, in a homoeopathically diluted shape, obtained a sort of
sanction by the Frankfort Assembly, these Democrats proclaimed that
they had saved the country and the people. These poor, weak-minded
men, during the course of their generally very obscure lives, had been
so little accustomed to anything like success, that they actually
believed their paltry amendments, passed with two or three votes
majority, would change the face of Europe. They had, from the
beginning of their legislative career, been more imbued than any other
faction of the Assembly with that incurable malady _Parliamentary
crétinism_, a disorder which penetrates its unfortunate victims with
the solemn conviction that the whole world, its history and future,
are governed and determined by a majority of votes in that particular
representative body which has the honor to count them among its
members, and that all and everything going on outside the walls of
their house--wars, revolutions, railway-constructing, colonizing of
whole new continents, California gold discoveries, Central American
canals, Russian armies, and whatever else may have some little claim
to influence upon the destinies of mankind--is nothing compared with
the incommensurable events hinging upon the important question,
whatever it may be, just at that moment occupying the attention of
their honorable house. Thus it was the Democratic party of the
Assembly, by effectually smuggling a few of their nostrums into the
"Imperial Constitution," first became bound to support it, although in
every essential point it flatly contradicted their own oft-proclaimed
principles, and at last, when this mongrel work was abandoned, and
bequeathed to them by its main authors, accepted the inheritance, and
held out for this _Monarchical_ Constitution, even in opposition to
everybody who _then_ proclaimed their own _Republican_ principles.

But it must be confessed that in this the contradiction was merely
apparent. The indeterminate, self-contradictory, immature character of
the Imperial Constitution was the very image of the immature,
confused, conflicting political ideas of these Democratic gentlemen.
And if their own sayings and writings--as far as they could
write--were not sufficient proof of this, their actions would furnish
such proof; for among sensible people it is a matter of course to
judge of a man, not by his professions, but his actions; not by what
he pretends to be, but by what he does, and what he really is; and the
deeds of these heroes of German Democracy speak loud enough for
themselves, as we shall learn by and by. However, the Imperial
Constitution, with all its appendages and paraphernalia, was
definitely passed, and on the 28th of March, the King of Prussia was,
by 290 votes against 248 who abstained, and 200 who were absent,
elected Emperor of Germany _minus Austria_. The historical irony was
complete; the Imperial farce executed in the streets of astonished
Berlin, three days after the Revolution of March 18th, 1848, by
Frederick William IV., while in a state which elsewhere would come
under the Maine Liquor Law--this disgusting farce, just one year
afterwards, had been sanctioned by the pretended Representative
Assembly of all Germany. That, then, was the result of the German
Revolution!

LONDON, July, 1852.




XVI.

THE ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENTS.


                                          AUGUST 19th, 1852.

The National Assembly of Frankfort, after having elected the King of
Prussia Emperor of Germany (_minus_ Austria), sent a deputation to
Berlin to offer him the crown, and then adjourned. On the 3rd of
April, Frederick William received the deputies. He told them that,
although he accepted the right of precedence over all the other
princes of Germany, which this vote of the people's representatives
had given him, yet he could not accept the Imperial crown as long as
he was not sure that the remaining princes acknowledged his supremacy,
and the Imperial Constitution conferring those rights upon him. It
would be, he added, for the Governments of Germany to see whether this
Constitution was such as could be ratified by them. At all events,
Emperor or not, he always would be found ready, he concluded, to draw
the sword against either the external or the internal foe. We shall
see how he kept his promise in a manner rather startling for the
National Assembly.

The Frankfort wiseacres, after profound diplomatic inquiry, at last
came to the conclusion that this answer amounted to a refusal of the
crown. They then (April 12th) resolved: That the Imperial Constitution
was the law of the land, and must be maintained; and not seeing their
way at all before them, elected a Committee of thirty, to make
proposals as to the means how this Constitution could be carried out.

This resolution was the signal for the conflict between the Frankfort
Assembly and the German Governments which now broke out. The middle
classes, and especially the smaller trading class, had all at once
declared for the new Frankfort Constitution. They could not wait any
longer the moment which was "to close the Revolution." In Austria and
Prussia the Revolution had, for the moment, been closed by the
interference of the armed power. The classes in question would have
preferred a less forcible mode of performing that operation, but they
had not had a chance; the thing was done, and they had to make the
best of it, a resolution which they at once took and carried out most
heroically. In the smaller States, where things had been going on
comparatively smoothly, the middle classes had long since been thrown
back into that showy, but resultless, because powerless, parliamentary
agitation, which was most congenial to themselves. The different
States of Germany, as regarded each of them separately, appeared thus
to have attained that new and definite form which was supposed to
enable them to enter henceforth the path of peaceful constitutional
development. There only remained one open question, that of the new
political organization of the German Confederacy. And this question,
the only one which still appeared fraught with danger, it was
considered a necessity to resolve at once. Hence the pressure exerted
upon the Frankfort Assembly by the middle classes, in order to induce
it to get the Constitution ready as soon as possible; hence the
resolution among the higher and lower bourgeoisie to accept and
support this Constitution, whatever it might be, in order to create a
settled state of things without delay. Thus from the very beginning
the agitation for the Imperial Constitution arose out of a reactionary
feeling, and sprang up among these classes which were long since tired
of the Revolution.

But there was another feature in it. The first and fundamental
principles of the future German Constitution had been voted during the
first months of spring and summer, 1848, a time when popular agitation
was still rife. The resolutions then passed, though completely
reactionary _then_, now, after the arbitrary acts of the Austrian and
Prussian Governments, appeared exceedingly Liberal, and even
Democratic. The standard of comparison had changed. The Frankfort
Assembly could not, without moral suicide, strike out these once-voted
provisions, and model the Imperial Constitution upon those which the
Austrian and Prussian Governments had dictated, sword in hand.
Besides, as we have seen, the majority in that Assembly had changed
sides, and the Liberal and Democratic party were rising in influence.
Thus the Imperial Constitution not only was distinguished by its
apparently exclusive popular origin, but at the same time, full of
contradiction as it was, it yet was the most Liberal Constitution in
all Germany. Its greatest fault was, that it was a mere sheet of
paper, with no power to back its provisions.

Under these circumstances it was natural that the so-called Democratic
party, that is, the mass of the petty trading class, should cling to
the Imperial Constitution. This class had always been more forward in
its demands than the Liberal-Monarchico-Constitutional bourgeoisie; it
had shown a bolder front, it had very often threatened armed
resistance, it was lavish in its promises to sacrifice its blood and
its existence in the struggle for freedom; but it had already given
plenty of proofs that on the day of danger it was nowhere, and that it
never felt more comfortable than the day after a decisive defeat, when
everything being lost, it had at least the consolation to know that
somehow or other the matter _was_ settled. While, therefore, the
adhesion of the large bankers, manufacturers, and merchants was of a
more reserved character, more like a simple demonstration in favor of
the Frankfort Constitution, the class just beneath them, our valiant
Democratic shopkeepers, came forward in grand style, and, as usual,
proclaimed they would rather spill their last drop of blood than let
the Imperial Constitution fall to the ground.

Supported by these two parties, the bourgeois adherents of the
Constitutional Royalty, and the more or less Democratic shopkeepers,
the agitation for the immediate establishment of the Imperial
Constitution gained ground rapidly, and found its most powerful
expression in the Parliaments of the several States. The Chambers of
Prussia, of Hanover, of Saxony, of Baden, of Würtemberg, declared in
its favor. The struggle between the Governments and the Frankfort
Assembly assumed a threatening aspect.

The Governments, however, acted rapidly. The Prussian Chambers were
dissolved, anti-constitutionally, as they had to revise and confirm
the Constitution; riots broke out at Berlin, provoked intentionally by
the Government, and the next day, the 28th of April, the Prussian
Ministry issued a circular note, in which the Imperial Constitution
was held up as a most anarchical and revolutionary document, which it
was for the Governments of Germany to remodel and purify. Thus Prussia
denied, point-blank, that sovereign constituent power which the wise
men at Frankfort had always boasted of, but never established. Thus a
Congress of Princes, a renewal of the old Federal Diet, was called
upon to sit in judgment on that Constitution which had already been
promulgated as law. And at the same time Prussia concentrated troops
at Kreuznach, three days' march from Frankfort, and called upon the
smaller States to follow its example, by also dissolving their
Chambers as soon as they should give their adhesion to the Frankfort
Assembly. This example was speedily followed by Hanover and Saxony.

It was evident that a decision of the struggle by force of arms could
not be avoided. The hostility of the Governments, the agitation among
the people, were daily showing themselves in stronger colors. The
military were everywhere worked upon by the Democratic citizens, and
in the south of Germany with great success. Large mass meetings were
everywhere held, passing resolutions to support the Imperial
Constitution and the National Assembly, if need should be, with force
of arms. At Cologne, a meeting of deputies of all the municipal
councils of Rhenish Prussia took place for the same purpose. In the
Palatinate, at Bergen, Fulda, Nuremberg, in the Odenwald, the
peasantry met by myriads and worked themselves up into enthusiasm. At
the same time the Constituent Assembly of France dissolved, and the
new elections were prepared amid violent agitation, while on the
eastern frontier of Germany, the Hungarians had within a month, by a
succession of brilliant victories, rolled back the tide of Austrian
invasion from the Theiss to the Leitha, and were every day expected to
take Vienna by storm. Thus, popular imagination being on all hands
worked up to the highest pitch, and the aggressive policy of the
Governments defining itself more clearly every day, a violent
collision could not be avoided, and cowardly imbecility only could
persuade itself that the struggle was to come off peaceably. But this
cowardly imbecility was most extensively represented in the Frankfort
Assembly.

LONDON, July, 1852.




XVII.

INSURRECTION.


                                          SEPTEMBER 18, 1852.

The inevitable conflict between the National Assembly of Frankfort and
the States Governments of Germany at last broke out in open
hostilities during the first days of May, 1849. The Austrian deputies,
recalled by their Government, had already left the Assembly and
returned home, with the exception of a few members of the Left or
Democratic party. The great body of the Conservative members, aware of
the turn things were about to take, withdrew even before they were
called upon to do so by their respective Governments. Thus, even
independently of the causes which in the foregoing letters have been
shown to strengthen the influence of the Left, the mere desertion of
their posts by the members of the Right, sufficed to turn the old
minority into a majority of the Assembly. The new majority, which, at
no former time, had dreamed of ever obtaining that good fortune, had
profited by their places on the opposition benches to spout against
the weakness, the indecision, the indolence of the old majority, and
of its Imperial Lieutenancy. Now all at once, _they_ were called on
to replace that old majority. _They_ were now to show what they could
perform. Of course, _their_ career was to be one of energy,
determination, activity. _They_, the _élite_ of Germany, would soon be
able to drive onwards the senile Lieutenant of the Empire, and his
vacillating ministers, and in case that was impossible they
would--there could be no doubt about it--by force of the sovereign
right of the people, depose that impotent Government, and replace it
by an energetic, indefatigable Executive, who would assure the
salvation of Germany. Poor fellows! _Their_ rule--if rule it can be
named, where no one obeyed--was a still more ridiculous affair than
even the rule of their predecessors.

The new majority declared that, in spite of all obstacles, the
Imperial Constitution must be carried out, and _at once_; that on the
15th of July ensuing, the people were to elect the deputies of the new
House of Representatives, and that this House was to meet at Frankfort
on the 15th of August following. Now, this was an open declaration of
war against those Governments that had not recognized the Imperial
Constitution, the foremost among which were Prussia, Austria, Bavaria,
comprising more than three-fourths of the German population; a
declaration of war which was speedily accepted by them. Prussia and
Bavaria, too, recalled the deputies sent from their territories to
Frankfort, and hastened their military preparations against the
National Assembly, while, on the other hand, the demonstrations of
the Democratic party (out of Parliament) in favor of the Imperial
Constitution and of the National Assembly, acquired a more turbulent
and violent character, and the mass of the working people, led by the
men of the most extreme party, were ready to take up arms in a cause
which, if it was not their own, at least gave them a chance of
somewhat approaching their aims by clearing Germany of its old
monarchical encumbrances. Thus everywhere the people and the
Governments were at daggers drawn upon this subject; the outbreak was
inevitable; the mine was charged, and it only wanted a spark to make
it explode. The dissolution of the Chambers in Saxony, the calling in
of the Landwehr (military reserve) in Prussia, the open resistance of
the Government to the Imperial Constitution, were such sparks; they
fell, and all at once the country was in a blaze. In Dresden, on the
4th of May, the people victoriously took possession of the town, and
drove out the King, while all the surrounding districts sent
re-inforcements to the insurgents. In Rhenish Prussia and Westphalia
the Landwehr refused to march, took possession of the arsenals, and
armed itself in defence of the Imperial Constitution. In the
Palatinate the people seized the Bavarian Government officials, and
the public moneys, and instituted a Committee of Defence, which placed
the province under the protection of the National Assembly. In
Würtemberg the people forced the King to acknowledge the Imperial
Constitution, and in Baden the army, united with the people, forced
the Grand Duke to flight, and erected a Provincial Government. In
other parts of Germany the people only awaited a decisive signal from
the National Assembly to rise in arms and place themselves at its
disposal.

The position of the National Assembly was far more favorable than
could have been expected after its ignoble career. The western half of
Germany had taken up arms in its behalf; the military everywhere were
vacillating; in the lesser States they were undoubtedly favorable to
the movement. Austria was prostrated by the victorious advance of the
Hungarians, and Russia, that reserve force of the German Governments,
was straining all its powers in order to support Austria against the
Magyar armies. There was only Prussia to subdue, and with the
revolutionary sympathies existing in that country, a chance certainly
existed of attaining that end. Everything then depended upon the
conduct of the Assembly.

Now, insurrection is an art quite as much as war or any other, and
subject to certain rules of proceeding, which, when neglected, will
produce the ruin of the party neglecting them. Those rules, logical
deductions from the nature of the parties and the circumstances one
has to deal with in such a case, are so plain and simple that the
short experience of 1848 had made the Germans pretty well acquainted
with them. Firstly, never play with insurrection unless you are fully
prepared to face the consequences of your play. Insurrection is a
calculus with very indefinite magnitudes, the value of which may
change every day; the forces opposed to you have all the advantage of
organization, discipline, and habitual authority: unless you bring
strong odds against them you are defeated and ruined. Secondly, the
insurrectionary career once entered upon, act with the greatest
determination, and on the offensive. The defensive is the death of
every armed rising; it is lost before it measures itself with its
enemies. Surprise your antagonists while their forces are scattering,
prepare new successes, however small, but daily; keep up the moral
ascendancy which the first successful rising has given to you; rally
those vacillating elements to your side which always follow the
strongest impulse, and which always look out for the safer side; force
your enemies to a retreat before they can collect their strength
against you; in the words of Danton, the greatest master of
revolutionary policy yet known, _de l'audace, de l'audace, encore de
l'audace!_

What, then, was the National Assembly of Frankfort to do if it would
escape the certain ruin which it was threatened with? First of all, to
see clearly through the situation, and to convince itself that there
was now no other choice than either to submit to the Governments
unconditionally, or take up the cause of the armed insurrection
without reserve or hesitation. Secondly, to publicly recognize all the
insurrections that had already broken out, and to call the people to
take up arms everywhere in defence of the national representation,
outlawing all princes, ministers and others who should dare to oppose
the sovereign people represented by its mandatories. Thirdly, to at
once depose the German Imperial Lieutenant, to create a strong,
active, unscrupulous Executive, to call insurgent troops to Frankfort
for its immediate protection, thus offering at the same time a legal
pretext for the spread of the insurrection, to organize into a compact
body all the forces at its disposal, and, in short, to profit quickly
and unhesitatingly by every available means for strengthening its
position and impairing that of its opponents.

Of all this the virtuous Democrats in the Frankfort Assembly did just
the contrary. Not content with letting things take the course they
liked, these worthies went so far as to suppress by their opposition
all insurrectionary movements which were preparing. Thus, for
instance, did Herr Karl Vogt at Nuremberg. They allowed the
insurrections of Saxony, of Rhenish Prussia, of Westphalia to be
suppressed without any other help than a posthumous, sentimental
protest against the unfeeling violence of the Prussian Government.
They kept up an underhand diplomatic intercourse with the South German
insurrections but never gave them the support of their open
acknowledgment. They knew that the Lieutenant of the Empire sided with
the Governments, and yet they called upon _him_, who never stirred, to
oppose the intrigues of these Governments. The ministers of the
Empire, old Conservatives, ridiculed this impotent Assembly in every
sitting, and they suffered it. And when William Wolff,[9] a Silesian
deputy, and one of the editors of the _New Rhenish Gazette_, called
upon them to outlaw the Lieutenant of the Empire--who was, he justly
said, nothing but the first and greatest traitor to the Empire, he was
hooted down by the unanimous and virtuous indignation of those
Democratic Revolutionists! In short, they went on talking, protesting,
proclaiming, pronouncing, but never had the courage or the sense to
act; while the hostile troops of the Governments drew nearer and
nearer, and their own Executive, the Lieutenant of the Empire, was
busily plotting with the German princes their speedy destruction. Thus
even the last vestige of consideration was lost to this contemptible
Assembly; the insurgents who had risen to defend it ceased to care any
more for it, and when at last it came to a shameful end, as we shall
see, it died without anybody taking any notice of its unhonored exit.

LONDON, August, 1852.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] The "Wolff" here alluded to is Wilhelm Wolff, the beloved friend
of Marx and Engels, who--to distinguish him from the many other
"Wolffs" in the movement at this period--was known to his intimates as
"Lupus." It is to this Silesian peasant that Marx dedicated the first
volume of "Capital."

                      "Dedicated
          To My Never-To-Be-Forgotten Friend
      The Brave, True, Noble Fighter In The Van-Guard
                   Of The Proletariat,
                     WILHELM WOLFF.

Born at Tornau, June 21st, 1809. Died in exile at Manchester, 9th May,
1864."




XVIII.

PETTY TRADERS.


                                          OCTOBER 2, 1852.

In our last we showed that the struggle between the German Governments
on the one side, and the Frankfort Parliament on the other, had
ultimately acquired such a degree of violence that in the first days
of May, a great portion of Germany broke out in open insurrection;
first Dresden, then the Bavarian Palatinate, parts of Rhenish Prussia,
and at last Baden.

In all cases, the _real fighting_ body of the insurgents, that body
which first took up arms and gave battle to the troops consisted of
the _working classes of the towns_. A portion of the poorer country
population, laborers and petty farmers, generally joined them after
the outbreak of the conflict. The greater number of the young men of
all classes, below the capitalist class, were to be found, for a time
at least, in the ranks of the insurgent armies, but this rather
indiscriminate aggregate of young men very soon thinned as the aspect
of affairs took a somewhat serious turn. The students particularly,
those "representatives of intellect," as they liked to call
themselves, were the first to quit their standards, unless they were
retained by the bestowal of officer's rank, for which they, of course,
had very seldom any qualifications.

The working class entered upon this insurrection as they would have
done upon any other which promised either to remove some obstacles in
their progress towards political dominion and social revolution, or,
at least, to tie the more influential but less courageous classes of
society to a more decided and revolutionary course than they had
followed hitherto. The working class took up arms with a full
knowledge that this was, in the direct bearings of the case, no
quarrel of its own; but it followed up its only true policy, to allow
no class that has risen on its shoulders (as the bourgeoisie had done
in 1848) to fortify its class-government, without opening, at least, a
fair field to the working classes for the struggle for its own
interests, and, in any case, to bring matters to a crisis, by which
either the nation was fairly and irresistibly launched in the
revolutionary career, or else the _status quo_ before the Revolution
restored as nearly as possible, and, thereby, a new revolution
rendered unavoidable. In both cases the working classes represented
the real and well-understood interest of the nation at large, in
hastening as much as possible that revolutionary course which for the
old societies of civilized Europe has now become a historical
necessity, before any of them can again aspire to a more quiet and
regular development of their resources.

As to country people that joined the insurrection, they were
principally thrown into the arms of the Revolutionary party, partly by
the relatively enormous load of taxation, and partly of feudal burdens
pressing upon them.

Without any initiative of their own, they formed the tail of the other
classes engaged in the insurrection, wavering between the working men
on the one side, and the petty trading class on the other. Their own
private social position, in almost every case, decided which way they
turned; the agricultural laborer generally supported the city artisan;
the small farmer was apt to go hand in hand with the small shopkeeper.

This class of petty tradesmen, the great importance and influence of
which we have already several times adverted to, may be considered as
the leading class of the insurrection of May, 1849. There being, this
time, none of the large towns of Germany among the center of the
movement, the petty trading class, which in middling and lesser towns
always predominates, found the means of getting the direction of the
movement into its hands. We have, moreover, seen that, in this
struggle for the Imperial Constitution, and for the rights of the
German Parliament, there were the interests of this peculiar class at
stake. The Provisional Governments formed in all the insurgent
districts represented in the majority of each of them this section of
the people, and the length they went to may therefore be fairly taken
as the measure of what the German petty bourgeoisie is capable
of--capable, as we shall see, of nothing but ruining any movement
that entrusts itself to its hands.

The petty bourgeoisie, great in boasting, is very impotent for action,
and very shy in risking anything. The _mesquin_ character of its
commercial transactions and its credit operations is eminently apt to
stamp its character with a want of energy and enterprise; it is, then,
to be expected that similar qualities will mark its political career.
Accordingly the petty bourgeoisie encouraged insurrection by big
words, and great boasting as to what it was going to do; it was eager
to seize upon power as soon as the insurrection, much against its
will, had broken out; it used this power to no other purpose but to
destroy the effects of the insurrection. Wherever an armed conflict
had brought matters to a serious crisis, there the shopkeepers stood
aghast at the dangerous situation created for them; aghast at the
people who had taken their boasting appeals to arms in earnest; aghast
at the power thus thrust into their own hands; aghast, above all, at
the consequences for themselves, for their social positions, for their
fortunes, of the policy in which they were forced to engage
themselves. Were they not expected to risk "life and property," as
they used to say, for the cause of the insurrection? Were they not
forced to take official positions in the insurrection, whereby, in the
case of defeat, they risked the loss of their capital? And in case of
victory, were they not sure to be immediately turned out of office,
and to see their entire policy subverted by the victorious
proletarians who formed the main body of their fighting army? Thus
placed between opposing dangers which surrounded them on every side,
the petty bourgeoisie knew not to turn its power to any other account
than to let everything take its chance, whereby, of course, there was
lost what little chance of success there might have been, and thus to
ruin the insurrection altogether. Its policy, or rather want of
policy, everywhere was the same, and, therefore, the insurrections of
May, 1849, in all parts of Germany, are all cut out to the same
pattern.

In Dresden, the struggle was kept on for four days in the streets of
the town. The shopkeepers of Dresden, the "communal guard," not only
did not fight, but in many instances favored the proceedings of the
troops against the insurgents. These again consisted almost
exclusively of working men from the surrounding manufacturing
districts. They found an able and cool-headed commander in the Russian
refugee Michael Bakunin, who afterwards was taken prisoner, and now is
confined in the dungeons of Munkacs, Hungary. The intervention of
numerous Prussian troops crushed this insurrection.

In Rhenish Prussia the actual fighting was of little importance. All
the large towns being fortresses commanded by citadels, there could be
only skirmishing on the part of the insurgents. As soon as a
sufficient number of troops had been drawn together, there was an end
to armed opposition.

In the Palatinate and Baden, on the contrary, a rich, fruitful
province and an entire state fell into the hands of the insurrection.
Money, arms, soldiers, warlike stores, everything was ready for use.
The soldiers of the regular army themselves joined the insurgents;
nay, in Baden, they were amongst the foremost of them. The
insurrections in Saxony and Rhenish Prussia sacrificed themselves in
order to gain time for the organization of the South German movement.
Never was there such a favorable position for a provincial and partial
insurrection as this. A revolution was expected in Paris; the
Hungarians were at the gates of Vienna; in all the central States of
Germany, not only the people, but even the troops, were strongly in
favor of the insurrection, and only wanted an opportunity to join it
openly. And yet the movement, having once got into the hands of the
petty bourgeoisie, was ruined from its very beginning. The petty
bourgeois rulers, particularly of Baden--Herr Brentano at the head of
them--never forgot that by usurping the place and prerogatives of the
"lawful" sovereign, the Grand Duke, they were committing high treason.
They sat down in their ministerial armchairs with the consciousness of
criminality in their hearts. What can you expect of such cowards? They
not only abandoned the insurrection to its own uncentralized, and
therefore ineffective, spontaneity, they actually did everything in
their power to take the sting out of the movement, to unman, to
destroy it. And they succeeded, thanks to the zealous support of that
deep class of politicians, the "Democratic" heroes of the petty
bourgeoisie, who actually thought they were "saving the country,"
while they allowed themselves to be led by their noses by a few men of
a sharper cast, such as Brentano.

As to the fighting part of the business, never were military
operations carried on in a more slovenly, more stolid way than under
the Baden General-in-Chief Sigel, an ex-lieutenant of the regular
army. Everything was got into confusion, every good opportunity was
lost, every precious moment was loitered away with planning colossal,
but impracticable projects, until, when at last the talented Pole
Mieroslawski, took up the command, the army was disorganized, beaten,
dispirited, badly provided for, opposed to an enemy four times more
numerous, and withal, he could do nothing more than fight, at
Waghäusel, a glorious though unsuccessful battle, carry out a clever
retreat, offer a last hopeless fight under the walls of Rastatt, and
resign. As in every insurrectionary war where armies are mixed of
well-drilled soldiers and raw levies, there was plenty of heroism, and
plenty of unsoldierlike, often unconceivable panic, in the
revolutionary army; but, imperfect as it could not but be, it had at
least the satisfaction that four times its number were not considered
sufficient to put it to the rout, and that a hundred thousand regular
troops, in a campaign against twenty thousand insurgents, treated
them, militarily, with as much respect as if they had to fight the Old
Guard of Napoleon.

In May the insurrection had broken out; by the middle of July, 1849,
it was entirely subdued and the first German Revolution was closed.

LONDON. (Undated.)




XIX.

THE CLOSE OF THE INSURRECTION.


                                          OCTOBER 23, 1852.

While the south and west of Germany was in open insurrection, and
while it took the Governments from the first opening of hostilities at
Dresden to the capitulation of Rastatt, rather more than ten weeks, to
stifle this final blazing up of the first German Revolution, the
National Assembly disappeared from the political theater without any
notice being taken of its exit.

We left this august body at Frankfort, perplexed by the insolent
attacks of the Governments upon its dignity, by the impotency and
treacherous listlessness of the Central Power it had itself created,
by the risings of the petty trading class for its defence, and of the
working class for a more revolutionary ultimate end. Desolation and
despair reigned supreme among its members; events had at once assumed
such a definite and decisive shape that in a few days the illusions of
these learned legislators as to their real power and influence were
entirely broken down. The Conservatives, at the signal given by the
Governments, had already retired from a body which, henceforth, could
not exist any longer, except in defiance of the constituted
authorities. The Liberals gave the matter up in utter discomfiture;
they, too, threw up their commissions as representatives. Honorable
gentlemen decamped by hundreds. From eight or nine hundred members the
number had dwindled down so rapidly that now one hundred and fifty,
and a few days after one hundred, were declared a quorum. And even
these were difficult to muster, although the whole of the Democratic
party remained.

The course to be followed by the remnants of a parliament was plain
enough. They had only to take their stand openly and decidedly with
the insurrection, to give it, thereby, whatever strength legality
could confer upon it, while they themselves at once acquired an army
for their own defence. They had to summon the Central Power to stop
all hostilities at once; and if, as could be foreseen, this power
neither could nor would do so, to depose it at once and put another
more energetic Government in its place. If insurgent troops could not
be brought to Frankfort (which, in the beginning, when the State
Governments were little prepared and still hesitating, might have been
easily done), then the Assembly could have adjourned at once to the
very center of the insurgent district. All this done at once, and
resolutely, not later than the middle or end of May, might have opened
chances both for the insurrection and for the National Assembly.

But such a determined course was not to be expected from the
representatives of German shopocracy. These aspiring statesmen were
not at all freed from their illusions. Those members who had lost
their fatal belief in the strength and inviolability of the Parliament
had already taken to their heels; the Democrats who remained, were not
so easily induced to give up dreams of power and greatness which they
had cherished for a twelvemonth. True to the course they had hitherto
pursued, they shrank back from decisive action until every chance of
success, nay, every chance to succumb, with at least the honors of
war, had passed away. In order, then, to develop a fictitious,
busy-body sort of activity, the sheer impotency of which, coupled with
its high pretension, could not but excite pity and ridicule, they
continued insinuating resolutions, addresses, and requests to an
Imperial Lieutenant, who not even noticed them; to ministers who were
in open league with the enemy. And when at last William Wolff, member
for Striegan, one of the editors of the _New Rhenish Gazette_, the
only really revolutionary man in the whole Assembly, told them that if
they meant what they said, they had better give over talking, and
declare the Imperial Lieutenant, the chief traitor to the country, an
outlaw at once; then the entire compressed virtuous indignation of
these parliamentary gentlemen burst out with an energy which they
never found when the Government heaped insult after insult upon them.

Of course, for Wolff's proposition was the first sensible word spoken
within the walls of St. Paul's Church; of course, for it was the very
thing that was to be done, and such plain language going so direct to
the purpose, could not but insult a set of sentimentalists, who were
resolute in nothing but irresolution, and who, too cowardly to act,
had once for all made up their minds that in doing nothing, they were
doing exactly what was to be done. Every word which cleared up, like
lightning, the infatuated, but intentional nebulosity of their minds,
every hint that was adapted to lead them out of the labyrinth where
they obstinated themselves to take up as lasting an abode as possible,
every clear conception of matters as they actually stood, was, of
course, a crime against the majesty of this Sovereign Assembly.

Shortly after the position of the honorable gentlemen in Frankfort
became untenable, in spite of resolutions, appeals, interpellations,
and proclamations, they retreated, but not into the insurgent
districts; that would have been too resolute a step. They went to
Stuttgart, where the Würtemberg Government kept up a sort of
expectative neutrality. There, at last, they declared the Lieutenant
of the Empire to have forfeited his power, and elected from their own
body a Regency of five. This Regency at once proceeded to pass a
Militia law, which was actually in all due force sent to all the
Governments of Germany.

They, the very enemies of the Assembly, were ordered to levy forces in
its defence! Then there was created--on paper, of course--an army for
the defence of the National Assembly. Divisions, brigades, regiments,
batteries, everything was regulated and ordained. Nothing was wanted
but reality, for that army, of course, was never called into
existence.

One last scheme offered itself to the General Assembly. The Democratic
population from all parts of the country sent deputations to place
itself at the disposal of the Parliament, and to urge it on to a
decisive action. The people, knowing what the intentions of the
Würtemberg Government were, implored the National Assembly to force
that Government into an open and active participation with their
insurgent neighbors. But no. The National Assembly, in going to
Stuttgart, had delivered itself up to the tender mercies of the
Würtemberg Government. The members knew it, and repressed the
agitation among the people. They thus lost the last remnant of
influence which they might yet have retained. They earned the contempt
they deserved, and the Imperial Lieutenant put a stop to the
Democratic farce by shutting up, on the 18th of June, 1849, the room
where the Parliament met, and by ordering the members of the Regency
to leave the country.

Next they went to Baden, into the camp of the insurrection; but there
they were now useless. Nobody noticed them. The Regency, however, in
the name of the Sovereign German people, continued to save the country
by its exertions. It made an attempt to get recognized by foreign
powers, by delivering _passports_ to anybody who would accept of them.
It issued proclamations, and sent commissioners to insurge those very
districts of Würtemberg whose active assistance it had refused when it
was yet time; of course, without effect. We have now under our eye an
original report, sent to the Regency by one of these commissioners,
Herr Roesler (member for Oels), the contents of which are rather
characteristic. It is dated, Stuttgart, June 30, 1849. After
describing the adventures of half a dozen of these commissioners in a
resultless search for cash, he gives a series of excuses for not
having yet gone to his post, and then delivers himself of a most
weighty argument respecting possible differences between Prussia,
Austria, Bavaria, and Würtemberg, with their possible consequences.
After having fully considered this, he comes, however, to the
conclusion that there is no more chance. Next, he proposes to
establish relays of trustworthy men for the conveyance of
intelligence, and a system of espionage as to the intentions of the
Würtemberg Ministry and the movements of the troops. This letter never
reached its address, for when it was written the "Regency" had already
passed entirely into the "foreign department," viz., Switzerland; and
while poor Herr Roesler troubled his head about the intentions of the
formidable ministry of a sixth-rate kingdom, a hundred thousand
Prussian, Bavarian, and Hessian soldiers had already settled the whole
affair in the last battle under the walls of Rastatt.

Thus vanished the German Parliament, and with it the first and last
creation of the Revolution. Its convocation had been the first
evidence that there actually _had been_ a revolution in January; and
it existed as long as this, the first modern German Revolution, was
not yet brought to a close. Chosen under the influence of the
capitalist class by a dismembered, scattered, rural population, for
the most part only awaking from the dumbness of feudalism, this
Parliament served to bring in one body upon the political arena all
the great popular names of 1820-1848, and then to utterly ruin them.
All the celebrities of middle class Liberalism were here collected.
The bourgeoisie expected wonders; it earned shame for itself and its
representatives. The industrial and commercial capitalist class were
more severely defeated in Germany than in any other country; they were
first worsted, broken, expelled from office in every individual State
of Germany, and then put to rout, disgraced and hooted in the Central
German Parliament. Political Liberalism, the rule of the bourgeoisie,
be it under a Monarchical or Republican form of government, is forever
impossible in Germany.

In the latter period of its existence, the German Parliament served to
disgrace forever that section which had ever since March, 1848, headed
the official opposition, the Democrats representing the interests of
the small trading, and partially of the farming class. That class was,
in May and June, 1849, given a chance to show its means of forming a
stable Government in Germany. We have seen how it failed; not so much
by adverse circumstances as by the actual and continued cowardice in
all trying movements that had occurred since the outbreak of the
revolution; by showing in politics the same shortsighted,
pusillanimous, wavering spirit, which is characteristic of its
commercial operations. In May, 1849, it had, by this course, lost the
confidence of the real fighting mass of all European insurrections,
the working class. But yet, it had a fair chance. The German
Parliament belonged to it, exclusively, after the Reactionists and
Liberals had withdrawn. The rural population was in its favor.
Two-thirds of the armies of the smaller States, one-third of the
Prussian army, the majority of the Prussian Landwehr (reserve or
militia), were ready to join it, if it only acted resolutely, and with
that courage which is the result of a clear insight into the state of
things. But the politicians who led on this class were not more
clear-sighted than the host of petty tradesmen which followed them.
They proved even to be more infatuated, more ardently attached to
delusions voluntarily kept up, more credulous, more incapable of
resolutely dealing with facts than the Liberals. Their political
importance, too, is reduced below the freezing-point. But not having
actually carried their commonplace principles into execution, they
were, under _very_ favorable circumstances, capable of a momentary
resurrection, when this last hope was taken from them, just as it was
taken from their colleagues of the "pure Democracy" in France by the
_coup d'état_ of Louis Bonaparte.

The defeat of the south-west German insurrection, and the dispersion
of the German Parliament, bring the history of the first German
insurrection to a close. We have now to cast a parting glance upon the
victorious members of the counter-revolutionary alliance; we shall do
this in our next letter.[10]

LONDON, September 24, 1852.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] After repeated search I have been unable to find the "next
letter" referred to in the above paragraph; and, if it was ever
written, there seems no doubt it was never published.--E. M. A.




XX.

THE LATE TRIAL AT COLOGNE.


                                          DECEMBER 22, 1852.

You will have ere this received by the European papers numerous
reports of the Communist Monster Trial at Cologne, Prussia, and of its
result. But as none of the reports is anything like a faithful
statement of the facts, and as these facts throw a glaring light upon
the political means by which the continent of Europe is kept in
bondage, I consider it necessary to revert to this trial.

The Communist or Proletarian party, as well as other parties, had
lost, by suppression of the rights of association and meeting, the
means of giving to itself a legal organization on the Continent. Its
leaders, besides, had been exiled from their countries. But no
political party can exist without an organization; and that
organization which both the Liberal bourgeois and the Democratic
shopkeeping class were enabled more or less to supply by the social
station, advantages, and long-established, every-day intercourse of
their members, the proletarian class, without such social station and
pecuniary means, was necessarily compelled to seek in secret
association. Hence, both in France and Germany, sprung up those
numerous secret Societies which have, ever since 1849, one after
another, been discovered by the police, and prosecuted as
conspiracies; but if many of them were really conspiracies, formed
with the actual intention of upsetting the Government for the time
being,--and he is a coward that under certain circumstances would not
conspire, just as he is a fool who, under other circumstances, would
do so;--there were some other Societies which were formed with a wider
and more elevated purpose, which knew that the upsetting of an
existing Government was but a passing stage in the great impending
struggle, and which intended to keep together and to prepare the
party, whose nucleus they formed, for the last decisive combat which
must, one day or another, crush forever in Europe the domination, not
of mere "tyrants," "despots" and "usurpers," but of a power far
superior, and far more formidable than theirs; that of capital over
labor.

The organization of the advanced Communist party in Germany was of
this kind. In accordance with the principles of the "Manifesto"[11]
(published in 1848), and with those explained in the series of
articles on "Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany," published
in the _New York Daily Tribune_, this party never imagined itself
capable of producing, at any time and at its pleasure, that revolution
which was to carry its ideas into practice. It studied the causes that
had produced the revolutionary movement in 1848, and the causes that
made them fail. Recognizing the social antagonism of classes at the
bottom of all political struggles, it applied itself to the study of
the conditions under which one class of society can and must be called
on to represent the whole of the interests of a nation, and thus
politically to rule over it. History showed to the Communist party
how, after the landed aristocracy of the Middle Ages, the monied power
of the first capitalists arose and seized the reins of Government;
how the social influence and political rule of this financial section
of capitalists was superseded by the rising strength since the
introduction of steam, of the manufacturing capitalists, and how at
the present moment two more classes claim their turn of domination,
the petty trading class and the industrial working class. The
practical revolutionary experience of 1848-1849 confirmed the
reasonings of theory, which led to the conclusion that the Democracy
of the petty traders must first have its turn, before the Communist
working class could hope to permanently establish itself in power and
destroy that system of wage-slavery which keeps it under the yoke of
the bourgeoisie. Thus the secret organization of the Communists could
not have the direct purpose of upsetting the present Governments of
Germany. Being formed to upset not these, but the insurrectionary
Government, which is sooner or later to follow them, its members
might, and certainly would, individually, lend an active hand to a
revolutionary movement against the present _status quo_ in its turn;
but the preparation of such a movement, otherwise than by spreading of
Communist opinions by the masses, could not be an object of the
Association. So well was this foundation of the Society understood by
the majority of its members, that when the place-hunting ambition of
some tried to turn it into a conspiracy for making an extempore
revolution they were speedily turned out.

Now, according to no law upon the face of the earth, could such an
Association be called a plot, a conspiracy for purposes of high
treason. If it was a conspiracy, it was one against, not the existing
Government, but its probable successor. And the Prussian Government
was aware of it. That was the cause why the eleven defendants were
kept in solitary confinement during eighteen months, spent, on the
part of the authorities, in the strangest judicial feats. Imagine,
that after eight months' detention, the prisoners were remanded for
some months more, "there being no evidence of any crime against them!"
And when at last they were brought before a jury, there was not a
single overt act of a treasonable nature proved against them. And yet
they were convicted, and you will speedily see how.

One of the emissaries of the society was arrested in May, 1851, and
from documents found upon him, other arrests followed. A Prussian
police officer, a certain Stieber, was immediately ordered to trace
the ramifications, in London, of the pretended plot. He succeeded in
obtaining some papers connected with the above-mentioned seceders from
the society, who had, after being turned out, formed an actual
conspiracy in Paris and London. These papers were obtained by a double
crime. A man named Reuter was bribed to break open the writing-desk of
the secretary of the Society, and steal the papers therefrom. But that
was nothing yet. This theft led to the discovery and conviction of the
so-called Franco-German plot, in Paris, but it gave no clue as to the
great Communist Association. The Paris plot, we may as well here
observe, was under the direction of a few ambitious imbeciles and
political _chevaliers d'industrie_ in London, and of a formerly
convicted forger, then acting as a police spy in Paris; their dupes
made up, by rabid declamations and blood-thirsty rantings, for the
utter insignificance of their political existence.

The Prussian police, then, had to look out for fresh discoveries. They
established a regular office of secret police at the Prussian Embassy
in London. A police agent, Greif by name, held his odious vocation
under the title of an attaché to the Embassy--a step which should
suffice to put all Prussian embassies out of the pale of international
law, and which even the Austrians have not yet dared to take. Under
him worked a certain Fleury, a merchant in the city of London, a man
of some fortune and rather respectably connected, one of those low
creatures who do the basest actions from an innate inclination to
infamy. Another agent was a commercial clerk named Hirsch, who,
however, had already been denounced as a spy on his arrival. He
introduced himself into the society of some German Communist refugees
in London, and they, in order to obtain proofs of his real character,
admitted him for a short time. The proofs of his connection with the
police were very soon obtained, and Herr Hirsch, from that time,
absented himself. Although, however, he thus resigned all
opportunities of gaining the information he was paid to procure, he
was not inactive. From his retreat in Kensington, where he never met
one of the Communists in question, he manufactured every week
pretended reports of pretended sittings of a pretended Central
Committee of that very conspiracy which the Prussian police could not
get hold of. The contents of these reports were of the most absurd
nature; not a Christian name was correct, not a name correctly spelt,
not a single individual made to speak as he would be likely to speak.
His master, Fleury, assisted him in this forgery, and it is not yet
proved that "Attaché" Greif can wash his hands of these infamous
proceedings. The Prussian Government, incredible to say, took these
silly fabrications for gospel truth, and you may imagine what a
confusion such depositions created in the evidence brought before the
jury. When the trial came on, Herr Stieber, the already mentioned
police officer, got into the witness-box, swore to all these
absurdities, and, with no little self-complacency, maintained that he
had a secret agent in the very closest intimacy with those parties in
London who were considered the prime movers in this awful conspiracy.
This secret agent was very secret indeed, for he had hid his face for
eight months in Kensington, for fear he might actually see one of the
parties whose most secret thoughts, words and doings, he pretended to
report week after week.

Messrs. Hirsch and Fleury, however, had another invention in store.
They worked up the whole of the reports they had made into an
"original minute book" of the sittings of the Secret Supreme
Committee, whose existence was maintained by the Prussian police; and
Herr Stieber, finding that this book wondrously agreed with the
reports already received from the same parties, at once laid it before
the jury, declaring upon his oath that after serious examination, and
according to his fullest conviction, that book was genuine. It was
then that most of the absurdities reported by Hirsch were made public.
You may imagine the surprise of the pretended members of that Secret
Committee when they found things stated of them which they never knew
before. Some who were baptized William were here christened Louis or
Charles; others, at the time they were at the other end of England,
were made to have pronounced speeches in London; others were reported
to have read letters they never had received; they were made to have
met regularly on a Thursday, when they used to have a convivial
reunion, once a week, on Wednesdays; a working man, who could hardly
write, figured as one of the takers of minutes, and signed as such;
and they all of them were made to speak in a language which, if it may
be that of Prussian police stations, was certainly not that of a
reunion in which literary men, favorably known in their country,
formed the majority. And, to crown the whole, a receipt was forged for
a sum of money, pretended to have been paid by the fabricators to the
pretended secretary of the fictitious Central Committee for this book;
but the existence of this pretended secretary rested merely upon a
hoax that some malicious Communist had played upon the unfortunate
Hirsch.

This clumsy fabrication was too scandalous an affair not to produce
the contrary of its intended effect. Although the London friends of
the defendants were deprived of all means to bring the facts of the
case before the jury--although the letters they sent to the counsel
for the defence were suppressed by the post--although the documents
and affidavits they succeeded in getting into the hands of these legal
gentlemen were not admitted in evidence, yet the general indignation
was such that even the public accusers, nay, even Herr Stieber--whose
oath had been given as a guarantee for the authenticity of that
book--were compelled to recognize it as a forgery.

This forgery, however, was not the only thing of the kind of which the
police was guilty. Two or three more cases of the sort came out during
the trial. The documents stolen by Reuter were interpolated by the
police so as to disfigure their meaning. A paper, containing some
rabid nonsense, was written in a handwriting imitating that of Dr.
Marx, and for a time it was pretended that it had been written by him,
until at last the prosecution was obliged to acknowledge the forgery.
But for every police infamy that was proved as such, there were five
or six fresh ones brought forward, which could not, at the moment, be
unveiled, the defence being taken by surprise, the proofs having to be
got from London, and every correspondence of the counsel for the
defence with the London Communist refugees being in open court treated
as complicity in the alleged plot!

That Greif and Fleury are what they are here represented to be has
been stated by Herr Stieber himself, in his evidence; as to Hirsch, he
has before a London magistrate confessed that he forged the "minute
book," by order and with the assistance of Fleury, and then made his
escape from this country in order to evade a criminal prosecution.

The Government could stand few such branding disclosures as came to
light during the trial. It had a jury--six nobles, two Government
officials. These were not the men to look closely into the confused
mass of evidence heaped before them during six weeks, when they heard
it continually dinned into their ears that the defendants were the
chiefs of a dreadful Communist conspiracy, got up in order to subvert
everything sacred--property, family, religion, order, government and
law! And yet, had not the Government, at the same time, brought it to
the knowledge of the privileged classes, that an acquittal in this
trial would be the signal for the suppression of the jury; and that it
would be taken as a direct political demonstration--as a proof of the
middle-class Liberal Opposition being ready to unite even with the
most extreme revolutionists--the verdict would have been an acquittal.
As it was, the retroactive application of the new Prussian code
enabled the Government to have seven prisoners convicted, while four
merely were acquitted, and those convicted were sentenced to
imprisonment varying from three to six years, as you have, doubtless,
already stated at the time the news reached you.

LONDON, December 1, 1852.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] "The Manifesto." This is the celebrated "Communist Manifesto,"
which the Communist Congress, held in London, November, 1847,
delegated Marx and Engels to draw up. It was published in 1848 (in
London). The fundamental proposition of the Manifesto, Engels writes
in his introduction to the "Communist Manifesto," translated by S.
Moore, and published by W. Reeves, "is that in every historical epoch,
the prevailing mode of economic production and exchange, and the
social organization necessarily following from it, form the basis upon
which is built up, and from which alone can be explained, the
political and intellectual history of that epoch; that consequently
the whole history of mankind has been a history of class struggles,
contests between exploiting and exploited, ruling and oppressed
classes; that nowadays a stage has been reached where the exploited
and oppressed class--the proletariat--cannot attain its emancipation
... without at the same time, and once and for all emancipating
society at large from all exploitation, oppression, class
distinctions, and class struggles." As to this fundamental proposition
of the Manifesto, it "belongs," says Engels, "wholly and solely to
Marx." The "Communist Manifesto" has been translated into well-nigh
every language, and is, again to quote Engels, "the most international
production of all Socialist literature."
